Praise of Infinite Qualities (Guṇāparyantastotra)

The Praise of Infinite Qualities, in Sanskrit Guṇāparyantastotra and in Tibetan Yönten Tayepar Töpa, is a hymn of praise in verse addressed to the Buddha, attributed in its colophon to the master Triratnadāsa. Speaking directly to the Buddha, the poet celebrates the boundless qualities he cultivated over countless lives as a bodhisattva: his refusal to seek peace for himself alone, his tireless generosity and diligence, his compassion for afflicted beings, and his skill in means, which led him to take birth even among animals for their sake. The hymn culminates in his awakening and his teaching of the four noble truths, and closes by dedicating the merit of the praise to the good of all beings. It is Toh 1155 in the Tengyur, where it belongs to the section of praises, or stotras, and it was translated into Tibetan by the Indian preceptor Sarvajñadeva and the translator Rinchen Chok, and edited by Paltsek.

In the language of India: guṇa aparyanta stotraṃ
In the language of Tibet: Praise of Infinite Qualities

Homage to the Omniscient One.

If, not knowing the bounds of the Victor's qualities, one were not to speak your praise,
no one would praise you at all, and your splendor would never be understood by beings.
Since it is no offense even if beings such as these should praise you,
therefore, though my understanding is very small, I strive toward this aim.

"One whose mind strives to help the three realms of existence deserves praise even while dwelling in the lower realms;
one whose mind is set on his own aim does not, even when he has passed into nirvāṇa": so you understood,
and therefore, unturned by the terrors of saṃsāra, firm and unmoving,
you strove to protect completely a world tormented by birth and death.

"Upon sentient beings, wounded by sufferings in the destinies of existence,
I, with my harsh mind, have brought many sufferings of every kind;
therefore, to bring them happiness, I must endure": so you thought,
and therefore you strove to bring beings the happiness of peace.

"Sentient beings blinded by ignorance, their minds degraded in intent,
who as my fathers and my sons, thinking of me as kin, helped me with loving-kindness:
to forsake them and win liberation for myself alone is not my way": so you thought,
and therefore you made the aspiration to bring protectorless beings to sure liberation.

"When in the past I underwent every kind of suffering in saṃsāra,
those long known to me, with minds of loving-kindness, were friends to me a hundred times;
when I gain happiness, how could I, having been served by them, enjoy it all myself?" so you thought,
and therefore you strove to partake even of the nectar of immortality in common with all sentient beings.

Granter of Boons, mindful of the pleasures once shared with sentient beings in the realms of rebirth,
because you would surely never forsake them, this is what you showed:
just as, when you yourself were born a parrot, the tree you had enjoyed when it was young
you would not forsake even when it had grown old, just so did you strive.

Because, while beings had not passed into nirvāṇa, no thought arose in you of passing into nirvāṇa,
and since in that case the state of a Sugata (a buddha) could not be attained, you did not do so;
therefore you strove to win the treasures of the qualities of omniscience:
apart from making the qualities of the ten powers your own, you had no other, lesser aim.

"Even those, whoever they may be, who have attained the state of a Sugata
once fell into conditions far more wretched than this": so you thought,
and therefore, even when you had fallen into misery, you did not despise yourself.
To scorn oneself is not fitting, and you did not let your manly vigor sink into dejection.

Since, "If awakening is attained through effort, which depends on oneself,
the state of a buddha is not hard to find": such was the understanding that arose in you,
therefore, even in times of peril, words that would turn back the firm aspiration to omniscience,
the words of those who delight in the lesser, you treated with contempt.

The river of afflictions in wild turmoil, the passes to the lower realms forever gaping open,
the guile of ordinary people, and evil companions ever and always present,
and "Sages are hard to find": these, the causes for losing heart and forsaking beings,
those very things became the causes of your compassion ever arising.

Such intense loving-kindness as arises in your mind toward beings
does not arise in the people of this world even toward themselves;
when the people of the world fall into want, they forsake even themselves,
but you, even in the direst peril, never wished to forsake beings.

"Whoever, even on seeing the lowly and the needy full of hope,
pitiless and craving the fruit of giving, scorns them and seeks out others endowed with virtues,
that man of ruined intent, though he gives, is no different from those who beg": so you thought,
and therefore, in your compassion, you chose to give to those who beg, and so you gave.

"Some, though untamed themselves, speak words endowed with reason,
yet because they act against their own words, they cannot tame others":
so you considered, and therefore, holding all beings in your heart,
you strove first of all to tame your own untamed self.

"Although even the unwholesome actions of the wise may turn into the happiness of peace,
still a noble one should never engage in what is unwholesome": so you thought,
and therefore, your nature ever perfectly pure, you turned away from evil deeds,
not out of fear of the lower realms, and not from wishing to enjoy the pleasures of the gods.

"Those who, heedless of beings, practice so as to reach peace for themselves:
if even they, unless they rely on diligence, will not in time to come see their purpose fulfilled,
what need to speak of one who has set out with diligence to deliver all beings without exception?" so you thought,
and therefore, heedless of your own happiness, you strove for awakening.

Even when your wealth was small, you did not give up the wish to give,
and though your possessions were few, with a heart that did not shrink you gave to those who begged.
Though you possessed great sovereignty, you had no dealings at odds with right conduct,
and though you had reached the bloom of youth, your heart had no attachment to sense pleasures.

Even when your learning and understanding were great, you did not praise yourself,
and other beings, of lesser qualities, you held in high esteem.
While abiding in a wealth of good qualities, you found fault with even small lapses in your own conduct,
and among unruly beings you dwelt at ease, without strain.

Though your mind, weary of existence and the afflictions, delighted in peace,
the qualities you enacted through compassion itself were in harmony with people.
Though you knew that none but the doer experiences the fruit,
nevertheless, to increase the prosperity of sentient beings, you cultivated treasures of merit.

Whatever qualities, such as wisdom, you always possessed,
you employed solely for the benefit of beings.
Your merits bear no fruit apart from this,
and though you dedicated them wholly to the prosperity of beings, they were not without purpose.

Never was there a time when you were parted from the means of helping others;
your means were never small, never without fruit, and their fruit was never small.
You took no delight in undertaking small deeds of merit,
and, like the ocean of waters, you were never sated by rivers of merit.

Nights made lovely by the radiance of the full autumn moon,

pools whose blooming utpala lotuses vie in splendor with wakeful eyes,
and mountains whose peaks are thick with hundreds of trees in flower:
none of these could steal away your mind, which delights solely in benefiting others.

When the world was brought low by sufferings, out of loving-kindness toward it
you knew with a compassionate mind, "The festival of the joys of the senses is not to be indulged in";
though you held sovereignty over the four continents, your heart was not in the least captivated by sense objects,
and, devoting yourself to the good of others, you passed your days entirely in that.

"Abundant riches that those who beg have never put to good use
are like a tree in a charnel ground bowed beneath the weight of its full blossoms": so you thought;
and therefore, since those who beg do not resort to a rich man of meager merit,
it weighed upon your heart when your treasure had no one to ask for it.

Whoever, without love, seeks for the sake of the fruit, like a merchant trading in existence,
has no wish to give even that fruit to those who beg;
but because your acts of giving, in their time, brought benefit to others,
therefore those who beg took even their fruit into their own hands.

Like birds to the trees on a mountainside heavy with ripened fruit,
like the weary to a pool in the wilderness ringed with fine trees grown about it,
to you who delight in those who ask, unhesitating and at ease, the mendicants seeking wealth
came swiftly from every side into your presence, and there they stayed.

Just as, when you gave away fortune and riches, subjects and queens, your own flesh and even your life,
you gave even your young son, most dearly loved, whose stainless form was like the young moon of autumn,
to those who begged, and grew diligent in this,
so too the habit of giving became steadfast in your heart.

Deeds such that even to hear of them brings pain to the people of this world,
deeds that even you yourself long refrained from, since they meant taking on harm to your body:
those very deeds, as you grew used to them, in time became your own nature.
Therefore good qualities are hard to increase unless one has made them thoroughly habitual.

Just as a physician, to drive out the grahas (seizing spirits) from one seized by a graha,
may strike him and speak harsh words, yet it is not the one seized that he strikes,
so you too deal with the afflictions themselves without tenderness,
but on beings who are afflicted you bestow your compassion.

Toward those richer than you in the wealth of qualities, you always gathered qualities with reverence;
toward your equals you acted with a mind of loving-kindness, to make good qualities habitual;
for the lowly, with compassion and supreme diligence, you brought good qualities into being;
and so you set about doing good to beings, to each as was fitting.

Just as a nurse may take up many and various measures for her own body,
yet does so to cure the child's illness, not to bring herself pleasure, not for her body's sake,
so you too, with great diligence, brought good qualities into being in yourself
for the enjoyment of beings, not for fame nor to outshine others.

Your understanding was engaged in learning the means of benefiting others,
and so, out of compassion, you yourself entered upon those very ways.
Through noble diligence, though your exertion was great, you never grew weary;
through these three, there was not the least benefit to others that you did not accomplish.

You did not deem your deeds to be works of great toil and strain,
and yet this conduct too came about, utterly marvelous and wholly inconceivable:
for though you had realized that sentient beings do not exist,
still, for the sake of sentient beings, you remained in existence even for countless ages.

Since wisdom teaches the ultimate and compassion shows the conventional,
therefore, although for you, who see things as they truly are, sentient beings do not exist,
when you came to possess the compassion that gives rise to the ten powers,
then you held wretched beings in loving-kindness, as a father loves his son.

Supreme awakening is not won by one who has given up on beings and slain the afflictions,
and one who sides with the afflictions does not gain even the power to help others by oneself;
therefore, when you made your diligence firm in order to attain awakening,
you cast off the afflictions like fragments not burnt away for good.

Your afflictions, held in check by mindfulness and knowing, bring about good qualities of many kinds;
afflictions that have been cast off even draw near to being causes of awakening.
Thus they never made your mind falter in its stride,
and you made even your succession of births among the destinies into fields for good qualities.

Beings who have become afflicted, crushed by the hundreds of sufferings that befall them,
bereft of strength and without a protector, wander wherever they may go;
when you, who have vanquished the enemy, the afflictions, act toward those beings with compassion,
you have mastery over taking up existence, leaving it, and remaining in it.

Having destroyed the latent tendencies whose domain is the base of nothingness,
you long explained to assemblies of the holy the means by which these are abandoned;
then you, possessed of skill in means to benefit the three worlds, drew yourself back again,
and, making aspirations even toward the animal realms, you took hundreds of births.

Whatever unwholesome actions of yours from the past were not certain to ripen,
since you possessed these, inclining you toward going into the animal destiny,
you drew them forth to ripen, and so accomplished the purpose you had in mind,
just as the force of poison is turned back by a pacifying secret mantra the sages (ṛṣis) have taught.

When you had always cast off unwholesome states and strife,
then, just as for you, the skilled one who makes beings flourish, moving in this destiny and that,
moral discipline came without effort, as to one bound by vows,
so you made yourself practiced in the ways of the holy that bring about awakening.

Like a mother, never for a moment parted from compassion,
to remove the many sufferings of the protectorless,
you moved without fear among the destinies of suffering; and for your skill in means
nothing whatever was hard to accomplish or hard to attain.

Since for you, who by various means tame beings sunk in evil,
even the animal destinies became, like the happy destinies, solely of great purpose,
and even when you were born in the lower realms your good conduct never declined,
therefore even your evil, turning into good qualities, was the same as virtue itself.

Some, relying rightly on you, entered upon the three awakenings, each according to their understanding;

likewise you set others in the stations of the meditative concentrations and the formless absorptions;
some entered upon giving and asked to take up observances of restraint;
so there is no beneficial quality at all that you did not bestow upon the world.

Those beings in the worlds who longed for sure liberation
you led up to the happy destinies, and you brought their virtue to full ripeness.
When you moved among the destinies to bring beings peace,
it was just as other great sages (ṛṣis), arising in their due time, have brought peace.

Since your mind was certain that, unless you cut off the births of beings and became a perfect buddha,
no one else could bring birth to peace,
therefore you, whose heart was bent on awakening, taught the paths that reach up to the peak of existence
in their proper way, and so the ages passed.

Because it went unrealized, the world grew blind with ignorance,
and beings wander through much suffering and never pass beyond the bounds of the Lord of Death:
that noble and fearless path, which the great sages of old have followed,
you came to know by yourself, in order to bring the suffering of beings to an end.

Just as, at the end of the age, when many suns have dried up its waters, this world
is burned by a great fire, spreading as if in fury, that consumes even the ashes,
so, you who are free of pride, even the imprints of the afflictions you had worn thin
were burned away for good by the great blazing fire of wisdom.

Those infinite qualities which seek to dwell only in the supreme ones of the three worlds,
which cannot abide together with even the least darkness,
and which, when you became a fully awakened buddha, all at once
came to rest in you like birds settling in a tree: from where did you obtain them?

Though the sun with its thousand bright rays and the moon set free of clouds,
which give exceeding joy, stand fixed in the very middle of the sky,
the black darkness of ignorance, shrouded in which beings roam the dense wilderness of existence,
it is you who taught the means to dispel it utterly.

"This is suffering, pervading all; this is its origin, from which it arises;
this is its ending; this is the means that leads to realizing that":
so, O Brahmā (the Buddha), you taught these, pure as the clear light of the moon;
realizing them, even those of low birth attain the state of Brahmā.

The light of the sun, for as long as the king of the western mountains
has not made the sun go down, for just so long dispels the gloom;
but the means you taught for bringing birth and death to an end,
even though you yourself have passed into peace, still dispels the darkness of the heart.

Thus have I praised, as though he were directly present, the Sugata, worthy of praise,
whom the foremost of the Brahmās, who became the preceptor of the gods, that treasury of the sacred, has praised;
by whatever treasures of merit I have gathered in this, may beings
come to whatever good the great sages intend.

The Praise of Infinite Qualities, composed by the master Triratnadāsa, is complete.

It was translated by the Indian preceptor Sarvajñadeva and the translator, the monk Rinchen Chok, and the chief editor-translator, the monk Paltsek, edited it and established the final text.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

Most stanzas quote the Bodhisattva's own reflection, closed by the quotative particle, and then state the deed it led to; "so you thought" renders that particle. In the stanza on diligence the text reads ci smon, which gives no sense here; it is translated as the common ci smos, "what need to speak of", which the a fortiori argument requires. In the stanza on generosity, dbang phyug chen po means "great sovereignty" (mahaiśvarya), not the god Maheśvara. The parrot who would not desert the tree that had fed him once it grew old alludes to the jātaka of the grateful parrot (compare the Pāli Mahāsuka Jātaka). Two verbs are given their likeliest sense: bkol nas, in the stanza on friends of past lives, as "having been served by them", and bdar, in the stanza on treasures of merit, as "cultivated" (literally "polished, refined").  Two evident copyists' slips are corrected: gang dang gang du ("wherever") for grang dang gang du, and dka' ("hard") for dga' in "hard to accomplish". The stanza on firm diligence is obscure as transmitted: its first line (gtugs ... bas pas) is taken as "given up on beings and slain (bsad pas) the afflictions", and its closing simile (ma bsregs ran gyi dum bu) is rendered only as "fragments not burnt away for good". With the stanzas that follow, it states the Mahāyāna teaching that a bodhisattva holds the afflictions in check by mindfulness instead of destroying them outright, so as to go on taking birth for the sake of beings. The rare shol gom is rendered "falter in its stride", and stong, between taking up existence and remaining in it, as "leaving it". The gifts of queens, flesh, life and a beloved son recall the jātakas of the Bodhisattva's perfection of giving, such as that of Viśvantara.  Two evident copyists' slips are read as intended: byang chub ("awakening") for byung chub, and 'bar ba ("blazing") for 'ang ra ba in the simile of the fire at the end of the age, which also restores the meter. In the stanza on the four truths the Buddha is addressed as Brahmā, and "the state of Brahmā" is the highest, holy state, which his teaching opens even to the low-born. The phrase nges tshul mchid kyis 'tshal, rendered "asked to take up observances of restraint", is uncertain. In the closing stanza, the one who praises the Sugata is described as foremost of the Brahmās, preceptor of the gods (the usual epithet of Bṛhaspati) and tshangs gter, "treasury of the sacred"; these are rendered by their meaning, since it is not certain whether one deity, several, or the poet himself is meant.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
