The Noble Teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom Requested by Suvikrāntavikrāmin (Āryasuvikrāntavikramaparipṛcchāprajñāpāramitānirdeśa)

The Noble Teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom Requested by Supreme Prowess, known in Sanskrit as the Ārya-suvikrāntavikrama-paripṛcchā-prajñāpāramitā-nirdeśa and in Tibetan as Phakpa Rab kyi Tsal gyi Nampar Nönpe Zhüpa Sherab kyi Pharol tu Chinpa Tenpa, is a Mahāyāna sūtra on the perfection of wisdom. Set in the Bamboo Grove at Kalandaka near Rājagṛha, it opens with the Buddha teaching before twelve hundred and fifty monks and countless bodhisattvas gathered from many buddha fields. A bodhisattva named Supreme Prowess then questions him, and the Buddha's answers set out the perfection of wisdom as a profound insight beyond all conceptual grasping and fixed views. This text is Toh 14 in the Kangyur, where it belongs to the Prajñāpāramitā, or Perfection of Wisdom, class of sūtras.

In the language of India: Ārya-suvikrāntavikrama-paripṛcchā-prajñāpāramitā-nirdeśa. In the language of Tibet: The Noble Teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom, Requested by Supreme Prowess. First volume.

Homage to all the buddhas, the bodhisattvas, and the noble śrāvakas.

Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One (the Buddha) was dwelling in Rājagṛha, in the Bamboo Grove, at Kalandaka. He was together with a great assembly of the Saṅgha of twelve hundred and fifty monks, and with immeasurable, innumerable bodhisattvas, great beings, who had gathered from different buddha fields and were bound to only one more birth. At that time the Blessed One, surrounded by many hundreds of thousands of retinues, was seated facing them and teaching the Dharma.

Then the bodhisattva, the great being called Supreme Prowess, who had come to be present in that very assembly, rose from his seat. He arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and bowed with palms joined toward the Blessed One. Then he spoke to the Blessed One as follows: If the Blessed One will grant me an opening, so that I may ask questions and receive answers, I would put a few questions to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly awakened buddha.

When he had spoken, the Blessed One said to the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess: Supreme Prowess, ask the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly awakened buddha, whatever you wish, and by answering each question you ask I shall gladden your mind.

When the Blessed One had spoken, the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess, said to him: Blessed One, they speak of the perfection of wisdom, the perfection of wisdom. Blessed One, in what way is it called the perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattvas, the great beings? Blessed One, how does a bodhisattva, a great being, practice the perfection of wisdom? Blessed One, how does a bodhisattva, a great being, who practices the perfection of wisdom, bring the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom to complete fulfillment? Blessed One, how is it that when a bodhisattva, a great being, cultivates the perfection of wisdom, the wicked Māra finds no opening, and all the deeds of Māra are recognized? Blessed One, when a bodhisattva, a great being, abides in the perfection of wisdom, how must he abide so that he swiftly brings to complete fulfillment the qualities of omniscience?

When he had spoken, the Blessed One said to the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess: Supreme Prowess, you have entered upon this for the sake of the bodhisattvas, the great beings, and so that you may benefit the many beings, bring happiness to the many beings, have compassion for the world, and bring the benefit, welfare, and happiness of the great multitude of gods and humans. Wishing to give clear light to the bodhisattvas, the great beings, of the present and of the future, you ask the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly awakened buddha about the perfection of wisdom. Excellent! Excellent!

Then the Blessed One, knowing it already, said to the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess: Supreme Prowess, seeing what purpose do you ask the Tathāgata about such a matter?

When he had spoken, the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess, said to the Blessed One: Blessed One, as a physician to all sentient beings, out of compassion for all sentient beings, and for the sake of all sentient beings, I ask the Tathāgata about this matter. Why so? Blessed One, because the perfection of wisdom gathers together the Dharma of the śrāvakas, of the pratyekabuddhas, of the bodhisattvas, and of the perfectly awakened buddhas, and indeed all phenomena.

Blessed One, those beings who are settled in the vehicle of the hearers, if they hear this, will quickly bring about directly the stage free of defilements. Those who are settled in the vehicle of the solitary buddhas will quickly go forth definitively in the vehicle of the solitary buddhas. Those who have properly entered upon unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening will quickly attain unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And those who have not entered the flawless correct path, and are not settled in any of the three, will, when they hear this, generate the mind of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Blessed One, so that the Tathāgata's answering this question on the Perfection of Wisdom may plant roots of virtue in all beings, I beg you to teach the domain of the Tathāgata and the wisdom of the Tathāgata.

Blessed One, I do not put this question to the Tathāgata for the sake of beings who are inclined to what is inferior. Not for those whose minds are impoverished, nor for those who have entered a poor vehicle. Not for the lazy, nor for those overpowered by laziness. Not for those sunk in the mire of wrong views, nor for those caught in the snares of Māra. Not for those without shame or embarrassment. Not for those who do not keep the requisites modest. Not for the deceitful, nor for the confused in mind. Not for those sunk in the mire of desire. Not for the crooked, nor for the fraudulent. Not for those careless of their deeds. Not for those who delight in wrongdoing, nor for those who practice wrongdoing. Not for those whose moral discipline has decayed, nor for those whose moral discipline is not purified. Not for those whose view has decayed. Not for those who move in the sphere of Māra. Not for those who praise themselves, nor for those who disparage others. Not for those who are greedy for gain and honor. Not for those attached to their almsbowl and robes. Not for the hypocritical. Not for the flatterers. Not for those who hint in order to obtain things. Not for those who barter and bargain. Not for those who pursue gain by means of gain. Blessed One, it is not for beings of that kind that I put this question to the Tathāgata.

Blessed One, I put this question for the sake of those beings who seek omniscient wisdom, wisdom without attachment, self-arisen wisdom, the wisdom that is both unequaled and equal, and unsurpassed wisdom. For those who do not apprehend even self or other, how could there be praising oneself and disparaging others? Blessed One, I put this question to the Tathāgata for the sake of beings whose pride is cut off like a severed horn, who are free of arrogance, whose thorn has been drawn out, whose minds are lowly like that of an outcaste, whose minds are equal to earth, water, fire, wind, and space; and for the sake of bodhisattvas, the great beings.

Blessed One, I put this question to the Tathāgata for the sake of those who do not even apprehend phenomena, who do not take pride and have no clinging, so how much less would they cling to what is not Dharma. I put this question for the sake of those bodhisattvas, the great beings, who have a pure intention; who are without crookedness and without deceit; who are upright and even-minded; who are healers and compassionate toward all beings; who bestow proper holding, proper encouragement, and proper joy; who carry the great burden; who have entered the Great Vehicle; who abide close to great undertakings; who possess great compassion; who lead all beings to attain happiness, lead them forth and guide them wholly; who abide without relying on any phenomenon; who seek no place of birth; who are completely freed from all the snares of Māra; who have aspiration and are endowed with diligence; who are heedful; who have gone to the supreme far shore of all phenomena; and who are skilled in cutting through all doubts.

Blessed One, I put this question to the Tathāgata for the sake of those beings who do not take pride even in the wisdom of the buddhas, who do not cling to it or dwell attached to it, who abide on the path that has completely passed beyond all arrogance, who have entered the path and who show the path; and for the sake of those bodhisattvas, the great beings.

Blessed One, I wish to bring about for all beings happiness, the happiness than which none is higher, the unsurpassed happiness, the happiness of nirvāṇa, the happiness of buddhahood, the happiness of the unconditioned. It is for the sake of the welfare, the healing, the happiness, and the accomplishment of all beings that I put this question to the Tathāgata. Blessed One, I myself am free of doubt, and being free of doubt, I wish to teach the Dharma in order to dispel the doubts of beings. Blessed One, it is to remove the doubts of all beings that I put this question to the Blessed One.

Why so? Blessed One, all beings dislike suffering and want happiness; all beings seek happiness. Blessed One, apart from wisdom I see no other happiness for beings, and apart from the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, the Great Vehicle, there is no other happiness for beings. Blessed One, having seen this reason, and wishing to bring about happiness for beings, I ask about the Perfection of Wisdom. Blessed One, because I clearly see this aim of the bodhisattvas, I put this question to the Tathāgata.

When he had spoken thus, the Blessed One said this to the bodhisattva, the great being Subduer by Supreme Prowess: "Excellent, excellent, Subduer by Supreme Prowess! Out of compassion for the multitudes of beings, you ask the Tathāgata about this Perfection of Wisdom, and the limit of your qualities is not easily fathomed. Therefore, Subduer by Supreme Prowess, listen well and hold it carefully in mind, and I shall explain it to you."

"Excellent, Blessed One," he replied, and the bodhisattva, the great being Subduer by Supreme Prowess, listened as the Blessed One had instructed. The Blessed One then said this: "Subduer by Supreme Prowess, you have said: 'Blessed One, the Perfection of Wisdom, the Perfection of Wisdom, as it is called: to what extent, Blessed One, is it called the Perfection of Wisdom of bodhisattvas?'

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, the Perfection of Wisdom cannot be expressed by any phenomenon, for the Perfection of Wisdom lies beyond all words. Subduer by Supreme Prowess, one cannot say: 'This is the Perfection of Wisdom,' or 'This belongs to the Perfection of Wisdom,' or 'By this is the Perfection of Wisdom,' or 'For the sake of this is the Perfection of Wisdom.' Subduer by Supreme Prowess, this is the far shore of all phenomena, and therefore it is called the Perfection of Wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, if even wisdom itself is neither attained nor apprehended by the Tathāgata, how could a perfection of wisdom be apprehended? Subduer by Supreme Prowess, what is called wisdom is the complete knowing of all phenomena, the complete understanding of all phenomena, and therefore it is called wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, what is this complete understanding of all phenomena? All these phenomena are expressed by one label or another; no phenomenon is free from expression. Yet that which completely knows all phenomena, and that which completely understands all phenomena, cannot be expressed in words either. Nevertheless, in accordance with how beings have come to know it, it is called wisdom. This is what is called a designation, and therefore it is called wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are not to be designated, not to be grasped, not to be spoken of, and have no appearance. To understand in this way is called complete understanding. Subduer by Supreme Prowess, what is called wisdom is neither a complete knowing nor a complete not-knowing. It is neither of those two, nor is it other than those two. Therefore it is called wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, it is neither the range of ignorance nor the range of primordial wisdom; it is neither the object of ignorance nor the object of primordial wisdom, for primordial wisdom is without an object. If primordial wisdom had an object, it would be ignorance. Primordial wisdom does not come from ignorance, and ignorance does not come from primordial wisdom. Primordial wisdom is not ignorance, and ignorance is not primordial wisdom. By primordial wisdom, one speaks of primordial wisdom; by primordial wisdom, one does not speak of ignorance; but one does call ignorance 'primordial wisdom.'

"Here, one cannot demonstrate even the slightest primordial wisdom by saying: 'This is that primordial wisdom,' or 'That primordial wisdom is by this,' or 'That primordial wisdom is for the sake of this.' Therefore that primordial wisdom does not exist through primordial wisdom itself. Primordial wisdom does not abide even as primordial wisdom, and by ignorance too one cannot speak of primordial wisdom. If primordial wisdom could be known through ignorance, then all ordinary, childish beings would possess primordial wisdom.

"That which does not apprehend primordial wisdom or ignorance, and which thoroughly knows primordial wisdom and ignorance exactly as they are, is itself called primordial wisdom. Primordial wisdom is not as it is spoken of. Therefore primordial wisdom is not to be expressed; it goes utterly beyond all objects. It is not the object of anything, and nothing is the object of primordial wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, the teaching of primordial wisdom is neither an object nor a side. That by which this is known does not fall into the category of 'possessing primordial wisdom' or 'not possessing primordial wisdom.' Subduer by Supreme Prowess, whatever is thus thoroughly known, subsequently realized, and completely understood, that is called wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, whatever is thus directly realized and made manifest is called the transcendent wisdom, yet it is not as the words 'transcendent wisdom' express it. Why? If even the world itself is not apprehended, how could there be a transcendent wisdom, let alone one by which something is liberated from the world? Why? Because it does not apprehend the world, it liberates nothing. Therefore it is called transcendent wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, what is called the world is spoken of as a designation. A designation is not what truly transcends the world, but that which truly passes beyond all designations is called transcending the world. What is to be crossed over does not transcend the world, but what is not to be crossed over does transcend the world. Why? Because there is not even the slightest phenomenon to be crossed over, or by which it could be crossed over, therefore it is called 'gone beyond.' For one who has transcended the world, there is neither world nor transcendence of the world. For the unsurpassed one there is no liberating, and therefore it is called transcending the world.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, this is the teaching of transcendent wisdom, yet it is not as the words 'transcendent wisdom' express it. Why? What transcends the world is not to be expressed; it is the crossing, and in it there is nothing at all to be crossed over. Therefore it is called transcendent wisdom.

"Subduer by Supreme Prowess, as for that wisdom which realizes definitively, what does it definitively realize? In this there is nothing at all to be definitively realized."

If there were anything at all to be fully comprehended, then that could be called "comprehension through wisdom." But there is nothing that comprehends, nothing that is fully understood, and no distinction by which anything could be comprehended can be found. What is called full comprehension here has no comprehender and nothing to be fully comprehended. Because there is neither a comprehender nor anything to be fully comprehended, it is called full comprehension. Here nothing reaches an end, and nothing is in a middle either; therefore it is called full comprehension. The comprehension of the wisdom of full comprehension does not comprehend anything above or beyond. It does not run anywhere, does not run in various directions, does not run about everywhere; therefore it is called full comprehension.

Suppose it is asked: Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, what does the wisdom called full comprehension fully comprehend? Whatever appears, all of that it fully comprehends. By what does it fully comprehend? By wisdom. How does wisdom fully comprehend? Whatever defining marks are imputed, all of them are without defining marks, and even the absence of defining marks exists only as an imputed defining mark.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, one who fully comprehends with wisdom of this kind comprehends the three realms. How does he comprehend them? He comprehends the three realms as being without realms, for here there is no realm at all to be comprehended. Thus he comprehends the three realms as being without realms. One who in this way fully comprehends the three realms as realmless, and by whom the three realms are thus fully comprehended, is said to possess the wisdom of full comprehension. How does one possess the wisdom of full comprehension? In what is to be fully comprehended there is nothing at all that is unwholesome; he fully comprehends everything as wholesome, and by the wisdom of full comprehension he passes beyond. One who possesses wisdom of this kind of comprehension fully comprehends whatever is seen, heard, smelled, tasted, touched, or cognized. How does he comprehend it? As impermanent, as suffering, as a boil, as a sickness, as a thorn, as empty, as evil, as harmful, as final, as perishing, as having the nature of perishing, as unstable, as of a destructible kind, as selfless, as unborn, as unceasing, and as without defining marks. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, such a one is called cooled and free of thorns.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, it is like this. Wherever the kind of medicine called "Thornless" is found, it removes every thorn and draws it out. In the same way, a monk endowed with such qualities becomes thornless and cooled, possesses the wisdom of full comprehension, and always dwells in the six. By the wisdom of full comprehension he is unattached to all three realms and passes completely beyond all the snares of Māra.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, it is like this. A vajra pierces whatever it is set against. In the same way, whatever a monk applies the vajra-like samādhi, taken up by the wisdom of full comprehension, to, and wherever he practices it, all of that he fully comprehends. The wisdom of full comprehension, being beyond the world and bringing about the true exhaustion of suffering, is without attachment; this is called the threefold knowledge (vidyā).

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, what is called knowledge is a synonym for the stilling of ignorance. What is called the full understanding of ignorance is a synonym for the stilling of the mass of suffering. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, it is like this. A skilled physician, lucid, quick of mind, endowed with superior insight, expert in all medicines, expert in every arising of disease, and able to release from all suffering, heals every sick person he treats, and they live. Why? Because he is expert in all medicines and expert in every arising of illness, and so he frees them from all diseases.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, in the same way, through the three knowledges all ignorance is stilled and all suffering is destroyed. Old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, mental distress, and turmoil are all stilled. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, this is called going forth to the full comprehension of the wisdom that is beyond the world. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, with this in mind I spoke these words:

For those who rightly know that rebirth in existence is exhausted,
And who go forth to comprehend it,
In the world theirs is the supreme wisdom.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, of what is "the exhaustion of rebirth in existence" a synonym? It is a synonym for fully understanding arising and passing away. What are arising and passing away? Whatever has the nature of arising, all of that has the nature of ceasing. Thus one fully comprehends arising and passing away. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, what is called arising is a synonym for coming into being; what is called passing away is a synonym for cessation. But arising and passing away are not as they are spoken of.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, whatever arises, that is not a phenomenon that arises. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, in equality there is no arising whatever; it does not come to arise. It follows equality, and therefore it is called "arising." Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, what is called following equality has no arising here at all; it does not come to arise. Its nature is to perish of itself, and that is cessation, yet in that there is no cessation at all. Equality is the unsurpassed cessation: where there is no arising, there is no cessation, and that is cessation. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, because thus there is no arising and no ceasing, the comprehension of arising and passing away is the full comprehension of passing away. Therefore it is called the full comprehension of arising and passing away.

"Fully realizing the one who is overwhelmed by the force of excellence" means fully understanding dependent origination. When a phenomenon arises in dependence on something, in dependence on that very thing that phenomenon does not exist. This is called fully realizing dependent origination.

Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, the one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, has been shown that the true nature of dependent origination, just as it is, is non-arising. That which does not arise is dependent origination, since nothing comes into being, and in that equality it is called dependent origination. Where there is no arising, how could there be cessation? That which does not conflict with cessation is the absence of cessation of dependent origination. Non-arising is called dependent origination.

What originates dependently has not come into being. What has not come into being is not past, not future, and not present. What is not past, not future, and not present has no cessation. What has no cessation is called the knowledge of non-arising. One who knows non-arising neither causes anything to arise nor makes cessation manifest. One who does not cause arising does not bring about cessation either, for only if there were arising would one know cessation. By not causing arising, one knows and sees all phenomena as cessation itself, fully realizes it, and makes it manifest. Therefore it is called making cessation manifest.

It is called the knowledge of exhaustion. The ignorance of the one overwhelmed by the force of excellence is exhausted, and therefore it is called the knowledge of exhaustion. By what is it exhausted? It is exhausted by the inexhaustible, and one does not see even its exhaustion. Because the one overwhelmed by the force of excellence is without ignorance, therefore this is called the knowledge of exhaustion. Because the one overwhelmed by the force of excellence fully knows ignorance, ignorance is exhausted, and so it is called the knowledge of exhaustion. Ignorance is neither exhausted nor unexhausted; since this is free from knowing, it is called the knowledge of exhaustion.

This one overwhelmed by the force of excellence fully knows things just as they truly are, and therefore it is called freedom from. Apart from this freedom from ignorance and freedom from knowing, nothing else is apprehended. If not even wisdom itself is apprehended, what need is there to speak of ignorance, from which one is liberated through exhaustion? Therefore it is called the knowledge of exhaustion, but not in the way it is expressed. In what is the knowledge of exhaustion there is nothing whatever that can be designated by convention; yet it is taught in this way as the exhaustion of ignorance and the knowledge of exhaustion.

One overwhelmed by the force of excellence, one who has grasped through investigation that all phenomena are inexhaustible and that the knowledge of exhaustion is likewise so, is free from the knowledge of exhaustion and attains the limit that is without exhaustion. The limit that is without limit is the limit of nirvāṇa, but not in the way it is expressed. All phenomena are the limit of nirvāṇa, which is limitless. The severing of all extremes is called the limit of nirvāṇa, but not in the way it is expressed. The limit of nirvāṇa is the severing of all conventions; it cannot be spoken of. O one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, this teaching of the realm of nirvāṇa is likewise not as it is taught. Since it has completely gone beyond all teachings, the realm of nirvāṇa cannot be shown. The complete severing of all teachings is called the realm of nirvāṇa. What is called the realm of nirvāṇa refers to the teaching of the definitive realization of the world-transcending wisdom. O one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, that realm of nirvāṇa is taught as not abiding in any place and not abiding in any direction.

O one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, what then is the Perfection of Wisdom? In the Perfection of Wisdom there is neither this shore nor the other shore. If one apprehended this shore or the other shore in the Perfection of Wisdom, the Tathāgata would have spoken of the Perfection of Wisdom as having this shore or the other shore. Because this shore of the Perfection of Wisdom is not apprehended, there is no other shore of it either. Yet what is called the Perfection of Wisdom is the other shore of all phenomena. Therefore it is called the Perfection of Wisdom, but not in the way it is expressed. The Perfection of Wisdom is not established through words and deeds; the Perfection of Wisdom cannot be shown.

If all phenomena are understood in this way, then one has fully understood them just as they are, without contradiction. Why is that? Because in it there is nothing understood and nothing fully realized. The equality of understanding and full realization is awakening; understanding all phenomena is called awakening. How are all phenomena understood? In this there is no awakening whatever, and in this there is nothing understood. Why is that? O one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, if awakening were apprehended, then even in awakening an awakening would be apprehended. In awakening there is no awakening; in this way this awakening is to be manifestly and completely realized. Because there is nothing understood and nothing fully realized, it is called subsequent realization, but not in the way it is expressed. All phenomena are not understood and not fully realized, for a phenomenon does not exist by its own essential nature. To understand in this way is called awakening.

O one overwhelmed by the force of excellence, the Tathāgata does not apprehend awakening, and the Tathāgata does not cognize awakening, for awakening is not to be cognized and not to be fully cognized. The Tathāgata has neither known nor produced awakening, for awakening is unborn and not accomplished. Awakening belongs to no one, and in awakening there is no sentient being nor any designation of a sentient being.

Where there is no sentient being, and nothing that is designated as a sentient being, how can one say, "This is a bodhisattva; this is the perfection of wisdom of a bodhisattva"?

Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, in awakening there is no awakening, and in awakening there is no sentient being. For this awakening is utterly gone beyond. This awakening is unborn. This awakening is not accomplished. This awakening is without characteristic; in it no sentient being exists, and none is apprehended. Awakening is not something designated by sentient beings. To realize that there is no sentient being is what is called awakening. One who knows that awakening is not a sentient being is called a bodhisattva.

Why is this? Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, a bodhisattva is not one who gives rise to the perception of a sentient being. Because he demolishes the perception of a sentient being, he is called a bodhisattva; it is not as the words say. Why is this? Because a bodhisattva cannot be expressed in words, and because a bodhisattva is free of the intrinsic nature of a sentient being. Awakening is free of the perception of sentient beings. One who knows awakening in this way is called a bodhisattva.

How is awakening known? This awakening is utterly gone beyond. This awakening is not something made. This awakening is without birth and without cessation. Awakening is not known by awakening. Awakening is not an object of consciousness, not an object of cognition, not something to be designated. What is not accomplished is called awakening. Because he is free of conceptual thought and has cut off conceptuality, one who has realized it, who has fully penetrated it, is therefore called a bodhisattva; it is not as the words say. Why is this? Because there is no sentient being. If a bodhisattva were truly apprehended, then one could say, "This is awakening; this is a sentient being," and that awakening too would be found. One who realizes that there is no sentient being, that awakening is not a sentient being, and that it is free of sentient beings, is called a bodhisattva. Because he shatters the perception of a sentient being, he is called a bodhisattva.

Why is this? What is called the realm of sentient beings is a synonym for the absence of sentient beings. Because there is no realm of sentient beings, there is no sentient being in a sentient being. If a sentient being existed in a sentient being, it would not be called the realm of sentient beings. What is called the realm of sentient beings is taught as being without a realm; that which is without a realm is the realm of sentient beings. If the realm of sentient beings were itself a realm of sentient beings, then the life force would be identical with the body. And if the realm were something liberated apart from the realm of sentient beings, then the life force would be one thing and the body another. That which is without a realm is the realm of sentient beings; this falls under the heading of conventional designation and usage. In the realm of sentient beings there is no realm; apart from the realm, there is no realm of sentient beings. All phenomena are without a realm. With this in mind I have taught that the realm of sentient beings is not seen to diminish or to fill up.

Why is this? Because the realm of sentient beings is utterly secluded, the realm of sentient beings is not a sentient being. Just as the realm of sentient beings is not seen to diminish or to fill up, so all phenomena are not seen to diminish or to fill up. Among all phenomena there is nothing established that could diminish or fill up. One who realizes all phenomena in this way is said to have realized the qualities of a buddha. With this in mind I have taught that just as the realm of sentient beings is not seen to diminish or to fill up, so too all phenomena are not seen to diminish or to fill up. Because all phenomena are not established, they do not diminish and do not fill up; therefore the qualities of a buddha too do not diminish and do not fill up. Because all phenomena are thus realized, the qualities of a buddha are without diminishing and without filling up. Because all phenomena are without diminishing and without filling up, what is called the qualities of a buddha is not a synonym for the qualities of a buddha as something real. The qualities of a buddha cannot be diminished or filled up by anyone.

Why is this? Because it is the realization of all phenomena; for one who has realized all phenomena, there is no phenomenon that diminishes or fills up. What is called all phenomena is a synonym for the dharmadhātu, and in the dharmadhātu there is neither diminishing nor filling up. Why is this? Because the dharmadhātu is limitless. The realm of sentient beings and the dharmadhātu are not apprehended as different. In the realm of sentient beings and the dharmadhātu, no diminishing or filling up is apprehended or exists. One who has realized this is called awakened. Therefore it is said that the qualities of a buddha are not seen to diminish or to fill up.

Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, what is spoken of as being without diminishing and without filling up is a synonym for seeing correctly, as it is, what has been examined. Nothing can be removed from it or placed upon it; one who has realized it thus is called awakened.

Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, what is called awakening is the characteristic of a buddha. What is the characteristic of a buddha? The absence of characteristic in the characteristic of all phenomena is the characteristic of a buddha. Awakening is without characteristic; it is the reversal of the intrinsic nature of characteristics. One who has realized it thus is called awakened; it is not as the words say.

Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, one who has accorded with the realization of all phenomena is called a bodhisattva. Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, if someone, not truly knowing or realizing this Dharma, claims, "I am a bodhisattva," he is far from the stage of a bodhisattva, far from the qualities of a bodhisattva, and by the name of bodhisattva he deceives the world with its gods, humans and asuras. Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, if one became a bodhisattva merely through words, then all sentient beings would become bodhisattvas. Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa, what is called the stage of a bodhisattva is not a mere product of words.

Mere words cannot bring one to manifest, perfect awakening, the unsurpassed, complete awakening. By mere verbal action one does not attain awakening, nor the qualities of a bodhisattva. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, all sentient beings do move toward awakening, but they do not know it and have not grasped it; for that reason they are not called bodhisattvas. Why is that? Because sentient beings do not know that there are no sentient beings. If they knew this, then through their practices they would be fit to become bodhisattvas. All sentient beings, through their inversions, do not truly know their own conduct, their own object, or their own field of activity. If they truly knew their own conduct, they would never again conceptualize anything or engage in anything. Through these conceptualizations and these activities, all ordinary beings fixate on what is unreal and engage with it, yet they conceive the thought, "We are focusing on awakening." For those who engage in fixation and engage in conceptual thought, where is awakening? Where are the qualities of a bodhisattva? Those who truly know things in this way no longer engage in an unreal fixation, and they do not conceive any phenomenon as a notion of "mine." Therefore, that absence of engagement is called the conduct of a bodhisattva. A bodhisattva does not engage in thought or conceptuality. For one in whom there is no thought, there is no engagement whatsoever. For one in whom there is no conceptuality, there is no meaning of engagement at all. The entire conduct of buddhas and bodhisattvas proceeds without conceptualization; all of it is free of conceit and not accompanied by fixation. One who knows all phenomena in this way does not afterward fixate, nor engage in conceptualization, nor engage in any activity at all. It is by way of this non-engagement that it is called the conduct of bodhisattvas. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, in this way one engages in the conduct of a bodhisattva. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, one who has understood and fully realized phenomena in this way is therefore called a bodhisattva. Such a one has transmitted the notion of "sentient being," and so "without sentient beings" is a synonym for bodhisattva. Why is that? Because such a one knows that all sentient beings are unreal; that all sentient beings are not sentient beings; that all sentient beings are sentient beings only through inversion; that all sentient beings are sentient beings only through imputation; that all sentient beings are sentient beings only through fixating on what does not exist; that all sentient beings are sentient beings only because they have rendered their own conduct unworkable; and that all sentient beings are sentient beings because they are shaped by the formations of ignorance. Why is that? Sentient beings all mentally construct phenomena that do not exist; therefore all sentient beings are called sentient beings through the formations of ignorance. What are the phenomena that do not exist? They are the nonexistent phenomena called "I," "mine," or "I am." If there were any phenomenon called "I," "mine," or "I am," then all sentient beings would be real. But, Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, since no phenomenon called "I," "mine," or "I am" exists, sentient beings are unreal; all sentient beings are called sentient beings through the formations of ignorance. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, in no case is there any phenomenon called "sentient being" that is "I," "mine," or "I am." Because there is none, sentient beings are called unreal. "Unreal" is a synonym for "without sentient beings." Just as the notion of a sentient being clings to what is unreal, so sentient beings are called unreal. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, in what is called unreal there is nothing real whatsoever, and nothing has arisen. All phenomena too are unreal and have not arisen. Excessive attachment to the unreal sentient being is a binding; therefore fixation on the unreal is called a sentient being. Those beings do not know the very conduct that, once understood, is called bodhisattva; since they have not fully realized it, sentient beings are called unreal. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, one who has understood phenomena in this way is called a bodhisattva. "Bodhisattva" is a synonym for one who understands and knows all phenomena, and who realizes sentient beings accordingly. How does one know? As unreal, as unarisen, and as not inverted. What ordinary beings imagine is not thus; what ordinary beings find is not thus; and therefore such a one is called a bodhisattva. Why is that? Because awakening is not imagined and not conceptually constructed, awakening is not accomplished, and awakening is not apprehended. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, the Tathāgata has not attained awakening. Since all phenomena are not found and not apprehended, it is called awakening. This is called the awakening of the buddhas; it is not as it is spoken of in words. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, those who generate the mind for awakening, thinking "I shall generate this mind for the sake of awakening," and who entertain the conceit "There exists an awakening for which I generate the mind," are not called bodhisattvas; they are called beings who have arisen as sentient beings. Why is that? Because they cling to arising, and having clung to mind, they cling to awakening. Those who generate the mind for the sake of awakening are called those who cling to the mind of awakening. Because they mentally construct, they generate the mind for awakening; therefore one who constructs is called a sentient being and is not a bodhisattva. Why is that? Because they are called beings who have arisen as sentient beings. Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, awakening has not arisen, and awakening is inconceivable; therefore one cannot generate the mind for the sake of awakening.

Those who are overcome by Prabhāvyūha cling to birth itself, yet they do not truly know birth. Prabhāvyūha, the sameness of birth is the real. The sameness of mind is the real; whatever is the real, whatever is sameness, that sameness and that real is awakening. Where the real is just as it is, there is no conceptual thought whatsoever. But those beings imagine mind and awakening as two, cling to them as dual, and so give rise to the mind aspiring to awakening for the sake of awakening.

Prabhāvyūha, mind is not other than awakening, and awakening is not other than mind. In mind there is no awakening; in awakening there is no mind. What awakening is and what mind is, that is the real just as it is, suchness. In that there is neither awakening nor mind. One for whom mind itself, awakening, birth, and non-birth are not observed is called a bodhisattva. He is called a being of the real just as it is. He is called a great being.

Why is this? Because he knows whatever is not the real. And what is not the real? The whole world is not the real; it belongs to what is not the real. Alas, this abiding of the world is not the real; it has never come to be. Why is it said that what is not the real does not arise? Because in what is not the real there is no arising at all; what is not the real is non-arising. Therefore all phenomena, being without intrinsic nature, are called not the real. One who knows them in this way is called a being of the real just as it is. Because he does not cling to the real as "the real," he is called a being of the real just as it is, though not in the sense of the words as spoken. Why is this? Because in what is not the real just as it is, there is no being, and no great being, to be spoken of.

One who has fully grasped the Great Vehicle is called a great being. And what is the Great Vehicle? The wisdom of omniscience is the Great Vehicle. And what is the wisdom of omniscience? Whoever knows the conditioned and knows the unconditioned, knows the worldly and knows the transworldly, is called a great being. Why is this? Because he has no great perception of himself as a being, he is called a great being. Because in him there is no great mass of ignorance, he is called a great being. Because in him there is no great mass of formations, he is called a great being. Because in him there is no great mass of not-knowing, he is called a great being. Because in him there is no great mass of suffering, he is called a great being.

Prabhāvyūha, those who are overcome even disparage the perception of a great being. They do not observe mind; they do not truly know mental factors or the nature of mind; they do not observe awakening; they do not truly know the factors that are aspects of awakening or the nature of awakening. With a mind that does not know these, they do not see awakening, nor do they see mind apart from awakening. They do not see mind in awakening, nor awakening in mind. Where there is such dissolution, there is no meditating and no one who dissolves. That dissolver too is not observed, no pride is taken in it, and without clinging they give rise to the mind aspiring to awakening.

Prabhāvyūha, those who in this way give rise to the aspiration to awakening are called true bodhisattvas, and they do not turn back from awakening. Why is this? Because they do not see awakening, mind, arising, and cessation as separate things, and so they abide in awakening itself. They truly see nothing, cling to nothing, and conceptualize nothing. Prabhāvyūha, those who are thus liberated, and do not even form the thought of liberation, are called true bodhisattvas.

Prabhāvyūha, those who perceive beings, perceive awakening, and give rise to the aspiration for the sake of awakening are far from awakening; they are not near to awakening. Prabhāvyūha, those who see awakening as neither far nor near are near to awakening; that is giving rise to the aspiration to awakening. Prabhāvyūha, with this in mind I declared: whoever knows non-duality truly knows the buddha and the Dharma as well. Why? Because by fully knowing non-duality one fully knows all phenomena, since one realizes the self-nature of all phenomena. What is called the Dharma of non-duality is the knowing of the buddhadharmas; by fully knowing phenomena as non-dual, one fully knows the buddhadharmas. By fully knowing the self, one fully knows all three realms.

Prabhāvyūha, what is called fully knowing the self is the far shore of all phenomena. And what is the far shore of all phenomena? One who does not even observe a far shore, does not take pride in the far shore, and does not cling to the far shore, is called one who has gone to the far shore through full knowledge, though not in the sense of the words as spoken. Prabhāvyūha, in this way you should know this to be the ground of the bodhisattva. Where there is not even a particle to be known or realized, that is the bodhisattva's perfection of wisdom; in it, coming and going are not apparent.

This is the first chapter, called the Introduction.

Second volume. Then the venerable Ānanda said this to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, the arrogant, who dwell in characteristics, will become frightened at this teaching." Then the venerable Śāriputra said this to the venerable Ānanda: "Venerable Ānanda, this is not the domain of the arrogant; it is not something they realize. Therefore they will not be frightened by it."

Why is that? Those who have fallen into the hands of evil friends are already terrified of this, so this is not their domain, and they do not comprehend it. Venerable Ānanda, those who have set out in order to abandon pride, and who strive in order to abandon pride, will be terrified of this. Why is that? Because they fully know pride as pride, and they seek what is without pride, and seek the abandoning of pride.

Venerable Ānanda, those who do not apprehend pride, do not see it as truly existing, do not think of themselves as superior, and do not cling to it, are afraid of nothing, tremble at nothing, and are not made to tremble by anything. Venerable Ānanda, this presentation of the Dharma has not been entered upon for the sake of the proud. Venerable Ānanda, this is not the domain of the proud; there is no room for them in it. Those who strive and exert themselves in order to abandon pride are not truly exerting themselves.

Venerable Ānanda, "pride" is a synonym for exaggeration and superimposition. Those who engage in pride, who exaggerate and superimpose, do not conduct themselves in accord with the truth, and even those who do conduct themselves in accord with it are doubtful about this Dharma.

Venerable Ānanda, those who do not apprehend sameness, and yet it is not that they apprehend difference; who do not think of themselves as equal, and yet it is not that they think of themselves as unequal; who do not cling to sameness, and yet it is not that they cling to difference, are afraid of nothing, tremble at nothing, and are not made to tremble.

Venerable Ānanda, this is not the domain of any ordinary, foolish person, and they do not comprehend it. Venerable Ānanda, this is not known or understood by any ordinary, foolish person. Venerable Ānanda, those of the Śrāvaka Vehicle do not comprehend it either. Even those of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle who practice the profound Dharma do not comprehend it.

Venerable Ānanda, those of the Bodhisattva Vehicle who engage with signs, who are not embraced by a spiritual friend and have fallen into the hands of evil friends, also do not comprehend these teachings of non-attachment; it is not their domain. The exceptions, Venerable Ānanda, are the Śrāvaka Vehicle followers who have seen the truths, and those of the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have been taught by a spiritual friend, who are devoted to the profound Dharma, who conduct themselves in harmony with these teachings, and who have grasped this Dharma and practice it.

Venerable Ānanda, those bodhisattvas who are free of signs, who practice in the signless, who practice without diversity, who have thoroughly mastered the profound Dharma, who do not apprehend even mind or awakening, who make no distinction among phenomena, and who do not see any of them as truly existing, will not be bewildered by such a teaching, nor will they be doubtful. Why is that? Because they abide in accord with all phenomena and are not out of accord with them. Whatever anyone asks them about the Dharma, they answer in accord with it and speak in accord with it.

Then the Blessed One said this to the Venerable Ānanda: Ānanda, it is just as Śāriputra has said. Ānanda, this teaching of the Dharma, this awakening of the buddhas, and this awakening of the buddhas that accords with it, are not for the proud and are not within their range. Ānanda, the minds of beings who delight in what is inferior do not enter the vast Dharma of the buddhas. Ānanda, the proud who delight in what is inferior are carried along by the power of pride, and so they remain out of accord with the awakening of the buddhas.

Ānanda, this assembly is pure. It has performed service to the Victors of the past and cultivated roots of virtue; it has honored and served many buddhas; it is devoted to the profound and practices the profound. Ānanda, the Tathāgata trusts this assembly, and so he does not hold back even a little of the Dharma he reveals and the Dharma that follows from it. Ānanda, this assembly is the essence. It is free of husks, chaff, and dregs. It has honored and served hundreds of thousands of buddhas and is firmly established in the essence.

Ānanda, "chaff" and "dregs" are synonyms for ordinary, foolish people, who have no room for this Dharma. Ānanda, "husk" is a synonym for proud beings. Ānanda, this assembly is without pride and has been raised up by great roots of virtue.

Ānanda, it is like this. Suppose the nāga king Anavatapta becomes exceedingly joyful. Joy and mental delight arise in him, and in his own abode he enjoys the five sensual pleasures and, in his own abode, sends down a great rain of water endowed with eight qualities, in great joy. His sons and retinue too are overjoyed; in their own abodes they are rich and endowed with the five sensual pleasures, and they play and send down great rains.

Ānanda, in just the same way the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly awakened buddha also sends down a great rain of Dharma. And those eldest sons, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas, depart from this world realm to their own buddha fields, and, beginning from this source of the Dharma, in the presence of those tathāgatas they let loose and send down a great rain of Dharma.

Ānanda, it is like this. When the nāga king Sāgara becomes exceedingly joyful, at that time he sends down a great stream of rain from his own abode. The nāgas who dwell in that place receive that stream of rain, become joyful, and find happiness in it. His sons and retinue also endure that stream of rain and attain the highest joy from it. Why is that? Because, Ānanda, other nāgas cannot endure that stream of rain, and other nāgas do not find happiness in it and are not made joyful by those streams of rain.

Ānanda, in the same way, those who have a special devotion to the Tathāgata's jewel of the Dharma, and those eldest sons of the Tathāgata, the bodhisattvas, the great beings who have created roots of virtue, whose aspiration is vast and who have come forth from the way of the profound Dharma, are able to bear this great rain of the Tathāgata's Dharma. Having heard it, they are overjoyed and delighted, and they know happiness. Ānanda, it is on account of this that the Tathāgata roars the great lion's roar in an assembly of pure intention and sends down the great rain of Dharma.

Ānanda, it is like this. Suppose a wheel-turning king possesses a great accumulated treasury of precious things. He summons all his many sons, who are of good family and pure on their mother's side as well, divides the treasury of jewels, and gives it to each son without deceiving any of them. Having received their shares in this way, they are filled with special joy and great delight toward that wheel-turning king, and they think, "We have come to share the same wealth as the wheel-turning king," and they know happiness.

In the same way, Ānanda, the Tathāgata, the King of the Dharma, the Lord of the Dharma, self-arisen, gathers his sons and divides equally among them this treasury of the jewel of the Dharma, deceiving none of them. They greatly increase their joy, delight, and reverence toward me, and, being of one purpose with me, they abide without cutting the lineage of the buddhas.

Ānanda, other sentient beings, who are inclined to what is inferior, who are proud, who live by views, who live by signs, who live by fixation on an object, who are crushed by the pride of thinking "I am," who are overpowered by attachment, aversion, and delusion, and who walk wrong paths, cannot bear this jewel of the Dharma. Ānanda, beings inclined to what is inferior do not desire the wealth of a wheel-turning king. Ānanda, only those who have become the sons of a wheel-turning king desire the wealth of a wheel-turning king.

Ānanda, poor beings do not feel any need for the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious gem, the precious queen, the precious householder, the precious minister, or for many garments, gold, jewels, pearls, beryl, conch, crystal, coral, quartz, and quantities of silver. Even if they obtain them, they cannot enjoy them with pleasure. They sell them for a trifling price, and in their ignorance they throw them away. Why is that? Because they are unskilled in precious things. Ānanda, a poor being does not even know the names of the precious things, such as "This precious thing is called so-and-so."

In the same way, Ānanda, those sons of the Tathāgata who have seen the truth, and those bodhisattvas, great beings, seek this treasury of the jewel of the Dharma. They desire and can bear this precious Dharma, which has no object of focus, which is endowed with emptiness, and which is endowed with the qualities of a buddha, and through it they accomplish what is to be done. But poor beings, who lack learning, whose learning has decayed, and who are like children without eyes, even if they find the treasury of the jewel of the Dharma, throw it away, saying "What use is it?" or think of giving it to others.

Ānanda, those beings who live by poverty, such as outcastes, sweepers, and those who work as cleaners of filth, if they receive many precious things from others, do not use them themselves but sell them for a trifling price and throw them away. Ānanda, "poor beings" is a designation for all the non-Buddhists (tīrthikas) and for those who are disciples of other non-Buddhist teachers. Ānanda, "poor beings" is also a designation for ordinary childish people who are sunk in the mire of views, who are fixed on an object, who cling to bondage, who live by signs, and who have gone astray on wrong paths. If they find this jewel of the Dharma, they cannot make use of it. They throw it away, or even give it to others to no purpose.

Ānanda, those sons of the buddhas who move in the domain of the buddhas, and who abide without cutting the lineage of the Tathāgata, make use of this jewel of the Dharma. Having found it, they do not waste it, and they come to perceive it as a jewel.

Ānanda, a jackal cannot give the lion's roar. Ānanda, only those who have become lion cubs, begotten by the great lion, roar the lion's roar. In the same way, Ānanda, ordinary childish people, who are like jackals and hold every kind of wrong view, cannot fully enjoy the Tathāgata's lion's roar and the Dharma of the fully awakened buddha, the great lion. Ānanda, only those sons of the perfectly awakened buddhas, who are begotten by the great lion of a buddha and by self-arisen wisdom, roar the lion's roar of the perfectly awakened buddhas and make use of it.

Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, how wondrous is this gathering of the Tathāgata's perfectly pure assembly. Blessed One, this perfectly pure assembly of the Tathāgata is a self-arisen assembly, an assembly that cannot be dislodged, an assembly like a vajra, unshaking, immovable, and untroubled. It is truly wondrous."

When he had said this, the Blessed One said to the venerable Śāriputra: "Śāriputra, can you fully recount the qualities of this assembly?"

Śāriputra replied: "Blessed One, I have no courage to fully recount the qualities of this assembly. Why is that? Blessed One, this assembly is like Mount Meru, because it possesses limitless qualities."

The Blessed One declared: "Śāradvatīputra, it is just so. This assembly is endowed with limitless qualities. Even perfectly awakened buddhas cannot fathom the limit of this assembly's qualities, so what need is there to speak of all other beings? Śāradvatīputra, this assembly has not been gathered by the Tathāgata, and the Tathāgata makes no effort at all with regard to it. Through their own roots of virtue they heard my name, and so this assembly gathered. The Tathāgata did not call upon anyone in this assembly or urge anyone to come. Impelled by their own roots of virtue, they came to this assembly. That such great beings gather when a Dharma teaching of this kind is given is the very nature of that teaching. Śāradvatīputra, when other blessed buddhas teach perfectly this very teaching, which cuts off all doubt about the bodhisattva collection, their assemblies too gather in just this way. That an assembly circle of this kind arises without fail is the nature of the teaching of this Dharma."

This is the second chapter, called "Ānanda."

Then the Blessed One said to the bodhisattva, the great being Pravikrāntavijaya (Subduer by Superior Power): "Subduer by Superior Power, the Perfection of Wisdom, as it is called, what is the bodhisattva's Perfection of Wisdom? It is the realization of the nearer shore of all phenomena. That cannot be demonstrated; nevertheless, I shall explain it fully, so that you may understand, and so that the Perfection of Wisdom may come into conventional expression.

Form is not the Perfection of Wisdom, and the Perfection of Wisdom is not something other than form. In the same way, apply this to feeling, perception, and formations, and consciousness: consciousness is not the Perfection of Wisdom, and the Perfection of Wisdom is not something other than consciousness.

Why is that? Subduer by Superior Power, the farther shore of form is not form. In the same way, apply this to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness: the farther shore of consciousness is not consciousness.

As the farther shore of form is, so too is form. In the same way, as the farther shore of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness is, so too is consciousness. As the farther shore of consciousness is, so too are all phenomena. That which is the farther shore of all phenomena is not all phenomena. As the farther shore of all phenomena is, so too are all phenomena.

Subduer by Superior Power, the statement that the farther shore of form is not form shows the separation of form. The statement that as the farther shore of form is, so too is form, shows the explanation of the essential nature of form. That shows form just as it is. That shows the intrinsic nature of form. That shows the non-apprehensibility of form. In the same way, the statement that the farther shore of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness is not consciousness shows the separation of consciousness. The statement that as the farther shore of consciousness is, so too is consciousness, shows the explanation of the essential nature of consciousness. That shows consciousness just as it is, the intrinsic nature of consciousness, and the non-apprehensibility of consciousness.

The statement that as the farther shore of consciousness is, so too are all phenomena, and the statement that that which is the farther shore of all phenomena is not all phenomena, show the separation of all phenomena. The statement that as the farther shore of all phenomena is, so too are all phenomena, shows the explanation of the essential nature of all phenomena. That shows all phenomena just as they are, the defining characteristic of all phenomena, the intrinsic nature of all phenomena, and the non-apprehensibility of all phenomena.

As all phenomena are just as they are, as their intrinsic nature is, and as their non-apprehensibility is, so too is the Perfection of Wisdom. Subduer by Superior Power, the Perfection of Wisdom does not abide in form. It does not abide in feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. The Perfection of Wisdom does not dwell far away from the inner or the outer or both of form, nor does it dwell far away from the inner or the outer or both of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness.

Subduer by Superior Power, the Perfection of Wisdom is neither possessed of form nor devoid of form. The Perfection of Wisdom is neither possessed of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness nor devoid of them. Subduer by Superior Power, the Perfection of Wisdom is neither possessed of any phenomenon nor devoid of it.

The suchness of form, the unmistaken suchness, the unaltered suchness, the suchness just as it is, that is the Perfection of Wisdom. In the same way, the suchness of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, the unmistaken suchness, the unaltered suchness, the suchness just as it is, that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Subduer by Superior Power, what is called form is separate from form. Why? Because in form there is no form, and that which is absent, that is the Perfection of Wisdom. It is the same with feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. Subduer by Superior Power, what is called consciousness is separate from consciousness. In consciousness there is no consciousness, and that which is absent, that is the Perfection of Wisdom. Subduer by Superior Power, form is separate from the intrinsic nature of form."

In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are also free of the intrinsic nature of consciousness. That which has the nature of being free is the perfection of wisdom. Form has no intrinsic nature of form. Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness have no intrinsic nature of consciousness. That which is without intrinsic nature is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is not the domain of form. Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are also not the domain of consciousness. Overcomer through Supreme Power, to say that it is not a domain means this: form by means of form does not truly know and does not see form. That which does not know and does not see through form is the perfection of wisdom. Overcomer through Supreme Power, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness do not see consciousness through consciousness. That which does not know and does not see through consciousness is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form does not know the essential nature of form through form. Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness do not know the essential nature of consciousness through consciousness. Fully knowing that there is no essential nature is called the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form does not bind itself to form, yet neither does it fail to bind itself. Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness do not bind themselves to consciousness, yet neither do they fail to bind themselves. That which neither binds nor fails to bind form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither something that diminishes nor something that increases. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither something that diminishes nor something that increases. That which neither diminishes nor increases form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither something that becomes afflicted nor something that becomes purified. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither something that becomes afflicted nor something that becomes purified. That which is neither afflicted nor purified, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is called the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither of the nature of purity nor of the nature of impurity. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither of the nature of purity nor of the nature of impurity. That which is neither of the nature of purity nor of the nature of impurity, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither something that passes on nor something that does not pass on. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither something that passes on nor something that does not pass on. That which neither passes on nor fails to pass on, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither a union nor a non-union. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither a union nor a non-union. That which is neither gathered together nor separated, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither a dying and transmigrating nor a being born. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither a dying and transmigrating nor a being born. That which neither dies and transmigrates nor is born, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither a being born nor a dying. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither a being born nor a dying. That which is neither born nor dying, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form neither revolves in saṃsāra nor is it of the nature of revolving. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness neither revolve in saṃsāra nor are they of the nature of revolving. That which does not revolve in saṃsāra and is not of the nature of revolving, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form neither becomes exhausted nor is it of the nature of exhaustion. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness neither become exhausted nor are they of the nature of exhaustion. That which does not become exhausted and is not of the nature of exhaustion, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither of the nature of origin nor of the nature of cessation. In the same way, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither of the nature of origin nor of the nature of cessation. That which is neither of the nature of origin nor of the nature of cessation, namely form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, is the perfection of wisdom.

Overcomer through Supreme Power, form is neither of a nature to arise nor of a nature to perish.

In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither of the nature to arise nor of the nature to perish. That which is not the very nature of arising and not the very nature of perishing, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither of a nature to change nor of a nature not to change. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither of a nature to change nor of a nature not to change. That which is not the very nature of change and not the very nature of non-change, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither permanent nor impermanent. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither permanent nor impermanent. That which is neither permanent nor impermanent, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither happiness nor suffering. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither happiness nor suffering. That which is neither happiness nor suffering, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither pleasant nor unpleasant. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither pleasant nor unpleasant. That which is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither self nor selfless. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither self nor selfless. That which is neither self nor selfless, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither of a nature of attachment nor of a nature free from attachment. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither of a nature of attachment nor of a nature free from attachment. That which is not the very nature of attachment and not the very nature of freedom from attachment, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither of a nature of aversion nor of a nature free from aversion. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither of a nature of aversion nor of a nature without aversion. That which is not the very nature of aversion and not the very nature of the absence of aversion, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, form is neither of a nature of delusion nor of a nature free from delusion. In the same way, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither of a nature of delusion nor of a nature free from delusion. That which is neither of a nature of delusion nor of a nature free from delusion, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is no agent and no one who causes to act. In the same way, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is no agent and no one who causes to act. That in which, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, there is no agent and no one who causes to act, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is no one who instigates and no one who fully instigates. In the same way, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is no one who instigates and no one who fully instigates. That in which, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, there is no instigator and no full instigator, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is no knowing and nothing that causes knowing. In the same way, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is no knowing and nothing that causes knowing. That in which, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, there is no knower and nothing that causes knowing, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is no one who feels and no one who causes feeling. In the same way, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is no one who feels and no one who causes feeling. That in which, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, there is no one who feels and no one who causes feeling, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is no cognizer and no seer. In the same way, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is no cognizer and no seer. That in which, for form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness, there is no cognizer and no seer, is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa, in form there is neither annihilation nor permanence.

Likewise, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness there is neither annihilation nor permanence. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither annihilated nor permanent is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess (Suvikrāntavikrama), form neither has an end nor is it endless. Likewise, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither have an end nor are they endless. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither have an end nor are endless is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form is neither a speculative view nor the abandoning of speculative views. Likewise, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither speculative views nor the abandoning of speculative views. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither speculative views nor the abandoning of speculative views is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form is neither craving nor the abandoning of craving. Likewise, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither craving nor the abandoning of craving. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither craving nor the abandoning of craving is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form is neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous. Likewise, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, in form no going or coming is found. Likewise, in feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness no going or coming is found. That in which no going or coming of form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness is found is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither abide nor do not abide. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither abide nor do not abide is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither the near shore nor the far shore. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither the near shore nor the far shore is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither moral discipline nor faulty discipline. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither moral discipline nor faulty discipline is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither attachment nor anger. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither attachment nor anger is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither give nor receive. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness neither give nor receive is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither patience nor impatience. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither patience nor impatience is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither diligence nor laziness. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither diligence nor laziness is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither meditative absorption nor distraction of mind. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither meditative absorption nor distraction of mind is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither wisdom nor faulty wisdom. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither wisdom nor faulty wisdom is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither inverted nor not inverted. That in which form, feeling, perception, the formations, and consciousness are neither inverted nor not inverted is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither applications of mindfulness nor non-applications of mindfulness. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither mindfulness nor non-mindfulness: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither right abandonments nor non-right abandonments. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither right abandonments nor non-right abandonments: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not bases of miraculous power or immeasurables. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither bases of miraculous power nor immeasurables: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, or the path. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, or the path: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not knowledge or liberation. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither knowledge nor liberation: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, or the attainments; they are not the superknowledges, nor are they other than the superknowledges. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, or the attainments, are not superknowledge, and are not the absence of superknowledge: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not emptiness, signlessness, or wishlessness. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not emptiness, not signlessness, and not wishlessness: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not conditioned or unconditioned. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither conditioned nor unconditioned: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not conjoined or disjoined. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither conjoined nor disjoined: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not knowing or unknowing. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither knowing nor unknowing: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness have no conceit, no wavering, and no conceptual elaboration. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not conceit, are not wavering, and are not free of conceptual elaboration: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not perception, nor are they non-perception. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not perception, nor non-perception: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither pacified nor unpacified. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are neither pacified nor unpacified: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness neither turn back nor do not turn back. That form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness neither turn back nor do not turn back: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the five aggregates is not the Perfection of Wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the five aggregates, the unerring suchness, the suchness that is not otherwise, the suchness that is just as it is: that is the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess (Suvikrāntavikrama), the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the elements, the sense sources, and dependent origination is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the elements, the sense sources, and dependent origination, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the inverted views and the obscurations is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the inverted views and the obscurations, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the thirty-six modes of conduct driven by craving is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the thirty-six modes of conduct driven by craving, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the sixty-two views is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the sixty-two views, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of the five superknowledges is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of the five superknowledges, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of all worldly phenomena, virtuous and nonvirtuous, that belong to the conditioned, is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, their suchness, their unerring suchness, their suchness that is not otherwise, and their suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, and the path is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching that concerns the coming into being of the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, and the path, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of the Four Noble Truths is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of the Four Noble Truths, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of the purity of moral discipline, meditative absorption, wisdom, liberation, and the knowledge and vision of liberation is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of the purity of moral discipline, meditative absorption, wisdom, liberation, and the knowledge and vision of liberation, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of the phenomena that belong to the unconditioned, that transcend the world, that do not abide, and that are free of defilement is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of the phenomena that belong to the unconditioned, that transcend the world, that do not abide, and that are free of defilement, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, nonarising, and the phenomenon that is not compounded is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, nonarising, and the phenomenon that is not compounded, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, the teaching of knowledge, liberation, freedom from attachment, cessation, and nirvāṇa is not the perfection of wisdom. Rather, the suchness of the teaching of knowledge, liberation, freedom from attachment, cessation, and nirvāṇa, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, and its suchness just as it is, that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, why is that? Because what is included in form is not the perfection of wisdom. Likewise, what is included in feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in earth, water, fire, wind, and space is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in the conditioned and the unconditioned is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in mundane and supramundane phenomena, or in phenomena with defilement and without defilement, is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in virtuous and nonvirtuous phenomena is not the perfection of wisdom either. What is included in the realm of sentient beings is not the perfection of wisdom either, and liberation from those phenomena is not the perfection of wisdom either.

Supreme Prowess, the perfection of wisdom is neither included in any phenomenon whatsoever nor not included. The suchness of the phenomena that are included and of those that are not included, their unerring suchness, their suchness that is not other, their suchness just as it is: that is the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, if one asks what the word "suchness" designates: Supreme Prowess, the phenomena that childish ordinary beings apprehend are neither thus nor otherwise. And the phenomena as the Tathāgata, the śrāvakas of the Tathāgata, and the bodhisattvas see them are suchness, unerring suchness, suchness that is not other. That is why it is called suchness. Supreme Prowess, this is the teaching of the perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings.

Supreme Prowess, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of decreasing or increasing any phenomenon. It is not present for the sake of gathering any phenomenon, or separating, or diminishing, or filling, or accumulating, or not accumulating, or moving on, or not moving on, or arising, or ceasing, or affliction, or purification, or engaging, or turning back, or origination, or setting, or characteristics, or sameness, or non-sameness, or the conventional, or the ultimate, or happiness, or suffering, or permanence, or impermanence, or the attractive, or the unattractive, or self, or selflessness, or truth, or falsehood, or an agent, or the absence of an agent, or coming into being, or not coming into being, or essential nature, or the absence of essential nature, or dying and transmigrating, or birth, or being born, or coming into full existence, or birth, or the origination of birth, or assembly, or non-assembly, or being with attachment, or being free from attachment, or being with aversion, or being free from aversion, or being with delusion, or being free from delusion, or inversion, or non-inversion, or apprehension, or non-apprehension, or exhaustion, or inexhaustibility, or knowing, or not knowing, or the high, or the low, or benefit, or non-benefit, or going, or not going, or existence, or nonexistence, or clinging, or anger, or light, or darkness, or laziness, or the undertaking of diligence, or emptiness, or non-emptiness, or signs, or signlessness, or wishing, or wishlessness, or conditioning, or non-conditioning, or setting, or not setting, or knowledge, or liberation, or peace, or non-pacification, or accomplishment, or non-accomplishment, or what is proper, or what is improper, or full understanding, or lack of full understanding, or renunciation, or non-renunciation, or discipline, or non-discipline, or moral discipline, or corrupt moral discipline, or distraction, or non-distraction, or wisdom, or corrupt wisdom, or consciousness, or non-consciousness, or abiding, or non-abiding, or equal fortune, or unequal fortune, or arising, or destruction, or attainment, or non-attainment, or clear realization, or non-realization, or direct manifestation, or non-manifestation, or full comprehension, or non-comprehension.

This concludes the chapter on suchness, the third.

Fascicle three.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. For example, a person who has dreamed a dream may describe and explain the nature of the dream, yet there is no showing of the nature of the dream. Why is that? If even the dream itself does not exist, how could there be any showing of the nature of the dream? Likewise, Supreme Prowess, though the nature of the perfection of wisdom is taught, there is no nature of the perfection of wisdom whatsoever.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. For example, a dream is not present for the sake of teaching any phenomenon. Likewise, the perfection of wisdom too is not present for the sake of teaching any phenomenon.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Suppose a person who has seen a magical illusion teaches an explanation of the nature of that illusion. Since a magical illusion has no nature whatsoever, how could what is taught as the nature of the illusion have any essential nature? In the same way, although one teaches the Perfection of Wisdom, nothing whatsoever is taught as the nature of the Perfection of Wisdom.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A magical illusion, for example, is not present in order to bring any phenomenon into being. In the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not present in order to bring any phenomenon into being.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Suppose a person who has seen an optical illusion teaches the nature of that optical illusion. Since an optical illusion has no nature whatsoever, how could there be any teaching of its nature? Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although one teaches the Perfection of Wisdom, since the Perfection of Wisdom has no nature whatsoever, how could there be any teaching of the nature of the Perfection of Wisdom?

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. An optical illusion, for example, is not present as the teaching of any phenomenon. In the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not present as the teaching of any phenomenon.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Suppose a person who has seen a mirage teaches an explanation of that mirage. Since nothing whatsoever is taught as a mirage, how could what is taught as a mirage have any nature? Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although one teaches the Perfection of Wisdom, nothing whatsoever is taught as the nature of the Perfection of Wisdom.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A mirage, for example, is not present as the teaching of any phenomenon. In the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not present as the teaching of any phenomenon.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A person standing within range of an echo hears the sound of the echo, yet does not see it; whenever he himself makes a sound, at that time he hears a sound. In the same way, one may hear the words that teach the Perfection of Wisdom, yet no phenomenon that is taught is heard. Were it otherwise, whenever it was expounded it would come within the range of what everyone knows and hears.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Suppose a person who has seen a mass of foam teaches the nature of that mass of foam. Since the nature of a mass of foam is not found either inside or outside, how could the nature of what is taught about it be found? Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although one teaches the Perfection of Wisdom, the nature of the Perfection of Wisdom too is not found.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A mass of foam, for example, does not come to be the nature that brings any phenomenon into being. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too does not come to be the nature that brings any phenomenon into being.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Suppose a person who has seen a water bubble teaches the nature of that water bubble. Since a water bubble has no nature at all, how could there be any teaching of the nature of a water bubble? Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although one teaches the Perfection of Wisdom, the Perfection of Wisdom has no nature.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A water bubble, for example, is not present for the arising of any phenomenon's coming into being. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not present for the arising of any phenomenon's coming into being.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A person may search everywhere for the core of a plantain tree and not find it, yet its leaves still serve a purpose. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although the Perfection of Wisdom too has no core, the Perfection of Wisdom still serves a purpose.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A person may conventionally speak of pointing out space, yet in space there is nothing whatsoever to be pointed out. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although the convention 'Perfection of Wisdom' is used, there is no phenomenon whatsoever to be conventionally designated as taught.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Although the convention 'space' is used, nothing taught is established or conventionally designated. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although the convention 'Perfection of Wisdom' is used, no word that teaches is conventionally designated.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. Although we conventionally speak of shade and sunlight, because no phenomenon is fully established, those two are not present as anything, and yet light is manifest. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although the Perfection of Wisdom enters into the words of convention as 'Perfection of Wisdom,' it does not enter into conventional words as the teaching of any phenomenon, and yet it illuminates phenomena.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. A polished precious jewel remains present as a great light, yet that light is neither inside nor outside. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom remains present through its great work of illumination, yet that light is not seen to be inside or outside.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, it is like this. When a lamp of mustard oil is lit, its radiating light does not remain for even an instant, yet it gives illumination, and by that light forms are seen. Suvikrāntavikrama, in the same way, although the Perfection of Wisdom does not abide in any phenomenon, it performs the work of illuminating phenomena. By that light the noble ones see all phenomena just as they truly are."

Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the Blessed One:

"Blessed One, it is wonderful that the perfection of wisdom is taught, and that the perfection of wisdom is taught as not established."

When he had said this, the Blessed One said to the venerable Śāriputra, "So it is, Śāriputra, so it is. Because form is not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because ignorance is not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because formations are not established, consciousness is not established, name and form are not established, the six sense sources are not established, contact is not established, feeling is not established, craving is not established, grasping is not established, becoming is not established, birth is not established, and old age, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and agitation are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because the elements and the sense sources are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because impermanence, suffering, selflessness, peace, the inversions, the obscurations, the activity of views, accumulation, and further accumulation are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because pleasure, pain, and what is neither pleasure nor pain are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because arising, perishing, abiding, and change are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because origination and disappearance, a self, a sentient being, a life, a nourisher, a man, a person, one born of Manu, a son of Manu, an agent, one who causes others to act, an instigator, one who fully instigates, a feeler, one who causes others to feel, a knower, and one who causes others to know are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because the true and the false, the conditioned and the unconditioned, the moving and the unmoving, the visible and the invisible, and the inner and the outer are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because earth, water, fire, wind, the desire realm, the form realm, the formless realm, space, consciousness, and the element of phenomena are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established.

"Because the following are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established: the ripening of karma, cause, condition, annihilation, permanence, the past, the future, the present, the prior end, the later end, the middle; moral discipline and corrupt discipline, patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom; mind, mentation, consciousness, the immediately preceding condition, death and transference, birth; affliction and purification; the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the path, the noble truths; the immeasurables, the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, the attainments, the superknowledges; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness; the virtuous and the nonvirtuous, the contaminated and the uncontaminated, the mundane and the supramundane, the blameworthy and the blameless, the conditioned and the unconditioned, the morally defined and the indeterminate; the white, the black, and what is neither white nor black; what is included in the realms and what is not included; the inferior, the superior, and the middling; attachment, aversion, and delusion; the seen, the heard, the distinguished, and the cognized; conceit, abiding, conceptual thought, investigation, analysis, and the object of focus; deceit, jealousy, and stinginess; coming together, the characteristic of duality, the unborn, and nonformation; calm abiding and insight; knowledge and liberation; exhaustion, freedom from attachment, cessation, the complete relinquishment of all the aggregates, and emergence; the conventional and the ultimate; the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas; the wisdom of omniscience, unattached wisdom, self-arisen wisdom, and the wisdom equal to the unequaled; the aspirations of bodhisattvas, the Saṅgha of śrāvakas, the excellence of pratyekabuddhas, what belongs to the immeasurable, the wisdom of the Dharma equal to the unequaled, the inexpressibility of all phenomena just as they are, and the knowing and seeing of all phenomena.

"Because having become cool, peace, and complete pacification are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because bringing sentient beings to maturity is not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because the excellence of the major marks, the purity of buddhafields, the powers of a buddha, the fearlessnesses, and the eighteen unshared qualities of a buddha are not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because nirvāṇa is not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established. Because everything up to all virtuous and nonvirtuous phenomena is not established, the perfection of wisdom is not established; and this should be applied in detail to everything in the same way.

"Śāriputra, it is like this: space, for example, is formless, indemonstrable, and without entity; it is not established. In the same way, the perfection of wisdom too is formless, indemonstrable, and without entity; it is not established.

"Śāriputra, it is like this: a rainbow, for example, appears in a variety of colors, yet no color whatsoever is established in it; none is apprehended."

In the same way, although the Perfection of Wisdom appears in a great variety of teachings, no intrinsic nature of a teaching is apprehended in it. Śāriputra, it is like this: no one has ever seen five fingers fully established in the sky. In the same way, Śāriputra, no one has ever seen an intrinsic nature by which the Perfection of Wisdom is fully established.

When he had spoken thus, the venerable Śāriputra said to the Blessed One (the Buddha), "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is hard to see."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because it does not come within anyone's sight."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, the Perfection of Wisdom is hard to understand."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because in it no fully established phenomenon to be fully and perfectly realized is apprehended at all."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom cannot be taught."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because it is not present as any phenomenon to be taught."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature."

He replied, "Śāriputra, because form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness have no intrinsic nature, this Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the elements, the sense sources, and dependent origination have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the distorted views, the obscurations, the speculative views, and the workings of craving have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because a self, a sentient being, a living being, a nourisher, a man, a person, one born of Manu, a son of Manu, an agent, one who causes action, an instigator, one who incites, a feeler, and an experiencer have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because earth, water, fire, wind, space, consciousness, and the element of phenomena have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because moral discipline and corrupt discipline, patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the factors conducive to awakening have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the noble truths, calm abiding, insight, the higher knowledges, the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because knowledge and liberation have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because exhaustion, freedom from attachment, and cessation have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the knowledge of non-arising and the knowledge of cessation have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because nirvāṇa has no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the ground of the śrāvakas, the ground of the pratyekabuddhas, and the ground of the buddhas have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because the teaching of knowledge of the ultimate and the conventional have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature. Because unattached wisdom and the wisdom of omniscience have no intrinsic nature, the Perfection of Wisdom has no intrinsic nature."

When he had spoken thus, the venerable Śāriputra said to the Blessed One, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of establishing any phenomenon, nor for the sake of its cessation."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because the Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the arising of any phenomenon, nor for its establishment, nor for its cessation, nor for its selflessness."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present by way of apprehending any phenomenon at all."

He replied, "Śāriputra, if even the nature of reality does not exist, what could be apprehended? For all phenomena are beyond apprehension."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the decrease or increase of any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because the Perfection of Wisdom does not truly perceive any phenomenon that would decrease or increase."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of passing completely beyond any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because this Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon to be passed completely beyond."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the diminishing or accumulating of any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon that would diminish or accumulate."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the coming together or separating of any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because this Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon that is conjoined or disjoined."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the proper way or the improper way of any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon that is honored or highly honored."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of benefiting or harming any phenomenon."

He replied, "Śāriputra, that is because the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon that is to be benefited or harmed."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of the occurring or non-occurring of any phenomenon."

The Blessed One (the Buddha) said, "Śāriputra, that is because this perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that arises or does not arise."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of joining with any phenomenon at all, or of not joining with it."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that joins or does not join."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of abiding with any phenomenon at all, or of not abiding."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because this perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that causes abiding or does not cause abiding."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of any phenomenon's advancing or turning back."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that advances or turns back."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of any phenomenon's activity or doing."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is the activity of some phenomenon or that becomes its doer."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of any phenomenon's being equal or unequal."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is equal or unequal."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of gathering or collecting any phenomenon at all."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is to be gathered in or to be cast away."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present through any activity whatsoever."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that performs any activity."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is profound."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, because form is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Śāriputra, because feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because ignorance is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because formations, consciousness, name and form, the six sense sources, contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and agitation are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the distortions are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the five obscurations are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because views are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the self is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because sentient beings are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because conceptual elaboration is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the absence of conceptual elaboration is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because moral discipline and corrupt discipline are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the non-distortions, the eightfold path, suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, the vision of the wisdom of liberation, the past, the future, the present, and the sameness of the three times are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the four fearlessnesses, the bases of miraculous power, and the superknowledges are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because unobstructed wisdom regarding the past, the future, and the present is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because the knowledge of exhaustion, the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of non-cessation, the knowledge of non-formation, and the knowledge of freedom from attachment are profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound. Because obscuration is profound, the perfection of wisdom is profound.

"Śāriputra, it is like this. For example, the ocean is vast and deep, immeasurable. In the same way, the perfection of wisdom too is vast and deep, immeasurable. Śāriputra, 'profound' means that in which immeasurable precious dharmas have been amassed and whose bottom cannot be found. Śāriputra, 'profound' means that one cannot find a way to go into it. Śāriputra, 'profound' means that the limit of its qualities cannot be fathomed. Śāriputra, it is profound in this way. For example, the great sea, the ocean, has amassed all jewels; it is filled with immeasurable jewels and completely filled with great jewels. In the same way, the perfection of wisdom too has amassed all precious dharmas; it has amassed great precious dharmas; it has amassed immeasurable precious dharmas."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present even for teaching any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom is not present so as to apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is taught."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for knowing or not knowing any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that becomes known or unknown."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this perfection of wisdom is not present for the sake of guarding or concealing any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is to be guarded or concealed."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present for the sake of gathering or collecting any phenomenon at all."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is to be gathered or collected."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as the abode or the basis of any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that would abide in it or take it as a basis."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as the abode or the basis of any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that would abide in it or take it as a basis."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as fixating on any phenomenon at all."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever on which to fixate."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as clinging excessively to any phenomenon at all."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not see at all any phenomenon whatsoever to which it might cling excessively."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as abiding or not abiding with any phenomenon at all."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever with which it abides together."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as linking any phenomenon, nor as not linking it."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that is to be linked or is not to be linked."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as attachment to any phenomenon, nor as freedom from attachment."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever to which it would become attached or not become attached."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as aversion toward any phenomenon, nor as the absence of aversion."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever toward which there is aversion or no aversion."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as delusion about any phenomenon, nor as freedom from delusion."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever about which it is deluded or not deluded."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not the knower of any phenomenon, nor what makes it known."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever that knows any phenomenon or that makes any phenomenon known."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as the intrinsic nature of any phenomenon, nor as not its intrinsic nature."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not see at all anything as the intrinsic nature of any phenomenon, nor as not its intrinsic nature."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not present as the purity or the complete purity of any phenomenon."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, it is so, for the Perfection of Wisdom does not see at all any phenomenon whatsoever that purifies or completely purifies any phenomenon."

Śāriputra said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure by its very nature."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, because form is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Śāriputra, because feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

"Because ignorance is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because formations are completely pure, consciousness is completely pure, name and form are completely pure, and the six sense sources are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, birth, aging, sickness, and death are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and distress are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

"Because the inverted views, the obscurations, and wrong views are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because attachment, aversion, and delusion are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because self, sentient being, life force, nourisher, man, person, one born of Manu, child of Manu, agent, one who causes action, experiencer, one who causes experience, instigator, prime instigator, and seer are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

"Because annihilation and permanence are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the finite and the infinite are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

"Because generosity is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because moral discipline, patience, diligence, meditative concentration, and wisdom are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

Because the applications of mindfulness and the right efforts are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because what is not mistaken is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the higher knowledges are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the path is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the ground of the śrāvakas is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the ground of the pratyekabuddhas is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the ground of the buddhas is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the seeing of past, future, and present is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because unobstructed wisdom is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the eighteen distinctive qualities of a buddha are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the desire realm is completely pure, the form realm is completely pure, and the formless realm is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the earth element is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the water, fire, and wind elements are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure. Because the realm of sentient beings is completely pure, the expanse of phenomena is completely pure, and the element of space is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure.

When this had been said, the venerable Śāriputra said to the Blessed One (the Buddha), "Blessed One, it is wonderful how the Perfection of Wisdom is thus completely pure by its very nature."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, because space is completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely pure."

He said, "Blessed One, the Perfection of Wisdom has no form; it cannot be pointed out."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom is thus not the fully established form of any phenomenon, nor does it abide as something that can be pointed out."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is unobstructed."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom thus does not truly perceive any phenomenon at all against which it would be obstructed."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is unmade."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because no maker is apprehended."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom does not come together with anything."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom thus does not truly perceive any phenomenon at all with which it would come together."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom cannot be designated."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom thus does not apprehend any phenomenon at all by which it could be designated."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is not held in common."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom thus does not apprehend any phenomenon at all with which it would be held in common."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is without characteristics."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, that is because no characteristics are apprehended."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom has no appearance."

The Blessed One said, "That is because no appearance is apprehended."

He said, "Blessed One, this Perfection of Wisdom is an infinite perfection."

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, because form is infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the mistaken views are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the obscurations are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because ignorance is infinite, formations are infinite, consciousness is infinite, name and form are infinite, and the six sense sources, contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and agitation are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because views are infinite, attachment, aversion, and delusion are infinite, annihilation and permanence are infinite, and the bounds of the prior limit are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the bounds of the later limit are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because generosity is infinite, moral discipline is infinite, patience is infinite, diligence is infinite, meditative concentration is infinite, and wisdom is infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the applications of mindfulness are infinite, the right efforts, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, and the factors of awakening are infinite, and what is not mistaken is infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the samādhis, and the meditative attainments are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because objects of focus are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because knowledge and the seeing of the wisdom of liberation are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the ground of the śrāvakas and the ground of the pratyekabuddhas are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the qualities of the śrāvakas, the qualities of the pratyekabuddhas, and the qualities of the buddhas are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because self and sentient beings are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the desire realm is infinite, this perfection is infinite.

Because the form realm is infinite and the formless realm is infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the superknowledges are infinite and the obscurations are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because the wisdom and vision of the past, the future and the present are infinite, this perfection is infinite. Because nonattachment is infinite, space is infinite and the realm of phenomena is infinite, this perfection is infinite.

Śāriputra, in the perfection of wisdom no beginning, middle or end is apprehended. It is not apprehended by anything at all. Śāriputra, this perfection of wisdom is infinite and boundless. Just as, for example, no limit to space is apprehended, so too no limit to the perfection of wisdom is apprehended. Because the earth element is infinite, the perfection of wisdom should be regarded as infinite. Because the water element is infinite, the fire element is infinite, the wind element is infinite, the space element is infinite and the consciousness element is infinite, the perfection of wisdom should be understood as infinite. Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom should be understood as having no end, no middle and no border. Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not abide in any place, nor does it abide in any direction.

Śāriputra, because form is boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Applying this in the same way, because feeling, perception, formations and consciousness are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because everything from ignorance up to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness and distress is boundless, Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because the inverted views are boundless, the obscurations are boundless and wrong views are boundless, Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because the self is boundless and sentient beings are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because generosity is boundless, moral discipline is boundless, patience is boundless, diligence is boundless, meditative concentration is boundless and wisdom is boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because the applications of mindfulness and the correct exertions are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Because the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, the concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions and the attainments are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Śāriputra, because suffering, its origin, its cessation and the path are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Śāriputra, because the superknowledges are boundless, liberation is boundless and the wisdom and vision of liberation are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Śāriputra, because the qualities of ordinary beings are boundless, the qualities of śrāvakas are boundless, the qualities of pratyekabuddhas are boundless and the qualities of buddhas are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless. Śāriputra, because knowledge is boundless, liberation is boundless and the wisdom and vision of liberation are boundless, the perfection of wisdom should be known as boundless.

Śāriputra, because no border can be apprehended, the perfection of wisdom is called boundless. Because no end can be apprehended, it is called infinite. Śāriputra, what is called "endless" is a word for "boundless." Śāriputra, because the self is unborn, all phenomena should be known as infinite. Śāriputra, because space is infinite, all phenomena should be known as infinite and boundless.

When the Blessed One had spoken thus, the venerable Śāriputra said to him, "Blessed One, for what kind of bodhisattvas does this Dharma become their domain?"

The Blessed One said, "Śāriputra, this Dharma is the domain and the range of those bodhisattvas who do not apprehend even the Dharma, let alone what is not the Dharma; who do not apprehend even the path, let alone what is not the path; who do not apprehend even moral discipline and are not conceited about it, let alone about corrupt discipline; who do not belong to any of the three realms, nor to any going into existence, any death and transmigration, or any birth; who are not attached even to body and life, let alone to external things; who have brought the stream of saṃsāra to an end, crossed the great ocean of existence, and passed beyond the great battle.

"Those who fully understand all domains as non-domains are holy beings of that kind. Those who are unattached to all domains are great lions. Those who have not entered into any domain are of that kind. Those who are unstained by all domains are unmixed with domains. Those who have completely transcended all domains are great caravan leaders. Śāriputra, this Dharma is not their domain and range.

"Śāriputra, in this assembly I do not see a single bodhisattva who has no faith in this Dharma, for whom it has not become their domain, or who has hesitation or doubt about a Dharma of this kind. Śāriputra, this assembly has no doubt about this Dharma, no wavering, no two-mindedness. Śāriputra, these bodhisattvas have no two-mindedness about this Dharma. Śāriputra, these holy beings remain in order to utterly destroy the two-mindedness of all sentient beings. Śāriputra, these have no hesitation about such a Dharma; they have completely transcended hesitation. Śāriputra, those who hear this teaching of the Dharma in the future, in the final period, will also abide without doubt about all phenomena, and will set out to cut through the doubts of all sentient beings. Śāriputra, I have not said that sentient beings with meager roots of virtue have faith in this Dharma. They have no access to this Dharma; it is not their wealth.

Śāriputra, if even those beings who merely hear this teaching of the Dharma with their ears are not ones with meager roots of virtue, what need is there to speak of those who take it up, retain it, read it, and master it? The buddhas, the blessed ones, have definitely prophesied them to the qualities of a buddha. Just as I now roar the lion's roar, the roar of fearlessness, the roar of the great person, and the roar of the self-arisen one, so too will they roar the lion's roar. Those who, having even just given rise to faith in this Dharma, come to give rise to aspiration for unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening receive that very same prophecy.

Why is this? Śāriputra, beings who hear the profound Dharma and give rise to joy, to supreme joy, and to conviction are extremely hard to find. Śāriputra, harder to find even than they is a being who hears the profound Dharma and then gives rise to the mind set on unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening and to conviction, and who is endowed with great virtue. Such a being is extremely hard to find. Śāriputra, there are beings who will hear this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom with their ears, who, having heard it, read it, have conviction in it, rejoice in it, and give rise to great gladness of mind, and who give rise to aspiration for this Dharma so as to hear it again and again. If I do not say that even they have entered the great round of saṃsāra, what need is there to speak of those who receive its transmission, recite it, and teach it to others?

Śāriputra, those who have not definitively entered the vehicle of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and who are not fixed in it, I prophesy to unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening. Śāriputra, I see no opening in this supreme Dharma for beings endowed with meager qualities. Śāriputra, this awakening of the buddhas is vast, while beings are for the most part inclined toward the inferior and endowed with meager qualities. They have not cultivated virtue in such a profound Dharma of nonattachment, and they are not skilled in it.

Śāriputra, this is the great wealth of those beings who are vast and inclined toward the vast Dharma; who have truly entered the Great Vehicle; who have fully found their purpose; who have donned the great armor well; who have realized the excellent meaning; who have set out on the great path, which is straight and without danger, level and without thickets, free of reeds and thorns, free of precipices and chasms, clean, unharmful, without crookedness, and without bends. And, Śāriputra, it is the great wealth of such bodhisattva great beings as have set out for the benefit of the world, for the happiness of the world, out of love for the world, and for the welfare, benefit and happiness of gods and humans; who bring light and have become a ford for beings; who are endowed with great compassion; who are lovingly intent on benefit, who wish for benefit, who wish for happiness, who wish for accomplishment and happiness, and who are intent on joining all beings with happiness.

Śāriputra, those great beings seek this precious jewel of the Dharma; it is their sacred wealth. Why is this? Śāriputra, beings who have not made merit, who are inclined toward the inferior, and whose faith has been ruined do not give rise to conviction in this vast wealth of the Dharma. Śāriputra, it was with this in mind that I said: "Beings inclined toward the inferior keep company, each according to their own element, with those inclined toward the inferior, and those inclined toward the vast with those inclined toward the vast."

Then the venerable Śāriputra said this to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, what is the sphere of activity of the Perfection of Wisdom?"

When he had said this, the Blessed One said this to the venerable Śāriputra: "Śāriputra, the object and sphere of activity of the Perfection of Wisdom are limitless. Śāriputra, it is like this: the object and sphere of activity of the wind element, for example, are limitless. In the same way, the object and sphere of activity of the Perfection of Wisdom are also limitless. Śāriputra, it is like this: space, for example, is the object and sphere of activity of the wind element. In the same way, the object and sphere of activity of the Perfection of Wisdom is space. Śāriputra, it is like this: the object and sphere of activity of the space element, for example, are limitless. In the same way, the object and sphere of activity of the Perfection of Wisdom are also limitless.

"Śāriputra, it is like this: the space element and the wind element, for example, do not appear anywhere, nor do they abide as the characteristic of any phenomenon's coming into being. Śāriputra, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too does not appear in any phenomenon, nor does it abide as the characteristic of any phenomenon's coming into being. Śāriputra, it is like this: the space element and the wind element, for example, cannot be grasped and are not established, and so they are not counted among the signs of color. Śāriputra, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too cannot be grasped and is not established, and so by no color and no sign whatsoever does it come to be counted as anything at all. Śāriputra, it is like this: the space element and the wind element, for example, are not seen to be any established phenomenon. In the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not seen to be any established phenomenon at all."

He asked: "Blessed One, what is the characteristic of this Perfection of Wisdom?"

He replied: "Śāriputra, this Perfection of Wisdom has no characteristic. Śāriputra, it is like this: the space element and the wind element, for example, do not come to be the characteristic of any established phenomenon. Śāriputra, in the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too does not come to be the characteristic of any established phenomenon. Śāriputra, because it is thus nonexistent, the Perfection of Wisdom is without characteristic. Śāriputra, it is like this: the space element, for example, is not attached anywhere. In the same way, the Perfection of Wisdom too is not attached anywhere, and therefore it is called 'the characteristic of nonattachment.'"

Śāriputra, non-attachment has no characteristic whatsoever. Nevertheless, the statement that the Perfection of Wisdom has the characteristic of non-attachment is a conventional expression. Śāriputra, non-attachment has no characteristic and no sign, and that very fact is taught as having no characteristic.

Śāriputra, what is called non-attachment is the full understanding of attachment. It is the non-apprehension of attachment. It is attachment just as it truly is. It is the full understanding of the inversion that is attachment. Śāriputra, there is no attachment in attachment. Therefore attachment just as it truly is, and the non-apprehension of attachment, are called non-attachment.

Śāriputra, because it teaches wisdom, this Perfection of Wisdom has the characteristic of non-attachment. Śāriputra, all phenomena have the characteristic of non-attachment. Whatever characteristic any phenomenon has is no characteristic, because no phenomenon is present by way of a fully established characteristic. That which has no characteristic is called characteristicless. In what is characteristicless there is no attachment. If the realm of phenomena had some characteristic, then there would be attachment to all phenomena. But because all phenomena have no characteristic, there is no attachment to them, and so all phenomena are said to have the characteristic of non-attachment; yet it is not as it is expressed.

The characteristic of non-attachment cannot be expressed. Why is that? It is the characteristic of non-attachment because it is nonexistent. It is the characteristic of non-attachment because it is void. It is the characteristic of non-attachment because it is not apprehended.

Śāriputra, whatever phenomenon is a phenomenon with the characteristic of non-attachment is not present as anything seen, nor is it unseen. Nevertheless, it has been taught to sentient beings as the characteristic of non-attachment.

Śāriputra, whatever is the characteristic of defilement is no characteristic. Defilement is not present by way of a characteristic; rather, Śāriputra, defilement is present by way of inversion. Whatever is inversion has no characteristic. What has no characteristic has no characteristic even conventionally; it is simply without characteristic.

Śāriputra, purification too has no characteristic. Why is that? Śāriputra, if even defilement itself has no characteristic, what need is there to speak of purification? Śāriputra, the full understanding of defilement is things just as they truly are. In that there is no defilement whatsoever; yet sentient beings are defiled through inversion. Whatever is inverted is not true. Whatever is not true has neither a fully established truth nor a characteristic. Śāradvatīputra, the one who understands in this way is called purified. If even defilement itself has no characteristic, what need is there to speak of purification?

Śāriputra, it is like this: these two, the phenomena of defilement and of purification, have no characteristic and are not fully established. Śāriputra, all phenomena have no characteristic and are not fully established, and that is called non-attachment. To say that all phenomena have the characteristic of non-attachment means that all phenomena are unattached; and yet, Śāriputra, all childish ordinary beings are attached to what is unattached.

Śāriputra, this characteristic of non-attachment of all phenomena is taught as the domain of wisdom. Śāriputra, this is the domain of the Perfection of Wisdom. The domain of wisdom, which has the characteristic of non-attachment, is the Perfection of Wisdom; therefore the domain of the Perfection of Wisdom is said to be infinite. The object and the domain of whatever is unattached are infinite.

Śāriputra, the word "domain" is a figurative expression for the absence of a domain. Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom is not distinguished by any characteristic of teaching a domain. Śāriputra, what is called an object is the fact that all phenomena have no object. It is things just as they truly are, and just as they are. Because they are nonexistent, all phenomena have no object. The full understanding of phenomena in this way is called object and domain; yet it is not as it is expressed. One who fully understands phenomena in this way is attached to nothing whatsoever, and that is called the characteristic of non-attachment. Therefore the Perfection of Wisdom is said to have the characteristic of non-attachment.

Śāriputra, for a Dharma such as this, not many companions are found. Whoever explains, correctly teaches, and analyzes a Dharma such as this is showing the domain of the Tathāgata's wisdom. Śāriputra, for this Dharma there are no other companions apart from the śrāvakas who have seen the truths and the irreversible bodhisattva great beings, irreversible persons perfect in view; and even those perfect in view who engage in this Dharma come to have doubts. Śāriputra, bodhisattvas who are free of doubt and who have realized it directly with their bodies will attain patience toward this Dharma, but, Śāriputra, childish ordinary beings will not.

Śāriputra, this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom will not come into the hands of sentient beings who are inclined toward the lesser. Rather, Śāriputra, this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom will come into the hands of those sentient beings who possess thoroughly purified roots of virtue and who have served many buddhas. This teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom will come into the hands of those sentient beings who have generated roots of virtue, whose intentions are virtuous, who have rendered service to the buddhas, the blessed ones, who have planted the seed for the sake of awakening, who have entered the vehicle of the Buddha, who dwell in the presence of the buddhas, the blessed ones, and who inquire properly. This teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom will come into the hands of those who are attaining patience, those who are close to it, and those who have attained patience. Those who have received the prophecy will also swiftly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, unless they are held back by the power of their aspirations.

Those who have not been prophesied will also quickly receive a prophecy in person.

Śāriputra, even those sentient beings whose roots of virtue have not fully matured, if this sūtra reaches their ears, should be known as prophesied. What need, then, to speak of those who obtain this sūtra, write it out, keep it, receive its transmission, recite it, and also teach it extensively to others? Śāriputra, it is impossible for sentient beings whose roots of virtue have not fully matured to listen to this sūtra, write it out, read it, or recite it. Śāriputra, this discourse on the Dharma will come into the hands of sentient beings whose roots of virtue are blazing. Śāriputra, you should have faith in this. You should understand it.

When a son or daughter of good family who belongs to the bodhisattva vehicle or to the śrāvaka vehicle obtains this Dharma, they should not be faint-hearted, lazy, or given to much sleep. They should not lack vigilance, fail to establish mindfulness, be distracted in mind, be attached to material things, or be greedy. They should not chatter idly, act the fool, speak insolently, or let their senses run loose.

Śāriputra, roots of virtue that have been planted do not fail. Having obtained this Dharma, a bodhisattva should devote himself to heedfulness, diligence, enthusiasm, faith, freedom from laziness, restraint of the senses, and refraining from idle chatter. He should establish mindfulness and apply himself to great learning. Having taken up diligence, he should strive to bring such qualities as these to completion.

Śāriputra, this is not the fruit of hearing such a Dharma: when bodhisattvas and śrāvakas who hear such a Dharma become heedless, become complacent, let their aspiration decline, let their diligence diminish, teach without being asked, and grow full of ill will, that is not the fruit of hearing. They have not heard such a Dharma as this.

Śāriputra, "heard" is a term for correct, earnest application, not for wrong application. Śāriputra, one who has set out wrongly will not hear this Dharma. Śāriputra, having heard it, you should be skilled in its meaning and abide in earnest application. Śāriputra, those who have set out wrongly do not have even conforming patience. Śāriputra, whoever does not practice wrongly with regard to this Dharma as it has been taught is called one who applies himself earnestly to this Dharma.

Śāriputra, persons who are perfect in patience and abide in earnest application will not go to the lower realms afterward, but will quickly accomplish this Dharma completely. One should not be complacent on the strength of meager roots of virtue alone; and until this Dharma has been fully accomplished, one should not relax one's effort, nor should one be complacent.

Śāriputra, whoever has trained in this Dharma, brought it to completion, and attained patience does not commit actions that would lead to the lower realms afterward. He will not again resort to laziness and decline, and therefore he becomes free of the fear of turning back. Nor will he become slack. And why is that? Śāriputra, it is because he fully understands affliction and purification. He sees correctly, just as it is, that all phenomena arise from error and are not real. Seeing correctly in this way is the perfection of patience. He is gentle and of few words, abides in pure moral discipline, and is perfect in conduct, in his sphere of activity, in his behavior, and in his restraint.

If even the gods have faith in such a person, what need to speak of humans? If even the gods delight in such a being, what need to speak of humans? If even the gods go into their presence, what need to speak of humans? If they are worthy of honor even from the gods, what need to speak of humans? If even the gods protect them, what need to speak of humans? Likewise, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, garuḍas, and gandharvas will also protect them. They will strive to protect them, shelter them, and keep them hidden.

This is the fourth chapter, called Examples.

Fascicle four.

Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the venerable Subhūti, "Venerable Subhūti, the Teacher is present here in person, and this assembly has become a vessel for the teaching of the profound Dharma. Venerable Subhūti, since this assembly is pure and wishes to hear the profound Dharma, why do you sit there in silence, not speaking with inspired eloquence on the subject of the Perfection of Wisdom?"

When he had said this, the venerable Subhūti replied, "Venerable one, I do not see any phenomenon on which I might speak with inspired eloquence. Venerable Śāriputra, I do not see the Perfection of Wisdom. Nor do I see a bodhisattva, inspired eloquence, what would be eloquently spoken, by whom it would be spoken, or from what it would be spoken. Venerable Śāriputra, since in this way I do not see the Perfection of Wisdom, the bodhisattva great being, what would be eloquently spoken, by whom it would be spoken, from what it would be spoken, or whose eloquence it would be, how should I teach? On what basis should I speak with inspired eloquence?

"Śāriputra, here this Perfection of Wisdom lies beyond conventional expression; it cannot be spoken and cannot be uttered. Venerable Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom cannot be spoken, explained, or expressed, and to answer in this way is itself the Perfection of Wisdom. Venerable Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom is not past, future, or present. Venerable Śāriputra, the Perfection of Wisdom cannot be taught as having the characteristic of the past, the characteristic of the future, or the characteristic of the present. Venerable Śāriputra, this Perfection of Wisdom is not a convention; it is without characteristics."

Venerable Śāriputra, the characteristic by which the perfection of wisdom would be taught is not truly perceived. Venerable Śāriputra, whatever is the past characteristic, the future characteristic, or the present characteristic of form, that is not the perfection of wisdom. Whatever is the past characteristic, the future characteristic, or the present characteristic of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, that is not the perfection of wisdom.

Venerable Śāriputra, the suchness of the characteristic of past, future, and present form, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, its suchness that is just as it is: that is the perfection of wisdom. The suchness of the characteristic of past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, its unerring suchness, its suchness that is not otherwise, its suchness that is just as it is: that is the perfection of wisdom. Venerable Śāriputra, that suchness of the characteristic of past, future, and present form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, that unerring suchness, that suchness that is not otherwise, that suchness that is just as it is, cannot be designated, cannot be expressed by any act of speech, cannot be explained, and cannot be answered. Venerable Śāriputra, whoever engages with the perfection of wisdom in this way realizes the perfection of wisdom.

Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not stand as the characteristic of teaching any phenomenon whatsoever. It does not stand as the characteristic of teaching form, nor as the characteristic of teaching feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. It does not stand as the characteristic of teaching dependent origination. It does not stand as the characteristic of name-and-form, the characteristic of a self, the characteristic of a sentient being, the characteristic of the realm of phenomena, the characteristic of union, the characteristic of separation, the characteristic of cause, the characteristic of condition, the characteristic of suffering, the characteristic of happiness, the characteristic of establishing, the characteristic of not establishing, the characteristic of arising, the characteristic of perishing, the characteristic of affliction, the characteristic of purification, the characteristic of intrinsic nature, the characteristic of the conventional, the characteristic of the ultimate, the characteristic of truth, the characteristic of falsehood, the characteristic of passing away, or the characteristic of entering into birth.

Why is that? Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom is free of all characteristics. It does not come within anyone's sight as "This is the perfection of wisdom," or "Here is the perfection of wisdom," or "By this is the perfection of wisdom," or "This one's perfection of wisdom." Venerable Śāriputra, I do not truly perceive the phenomenon by which the perfection of wisdom is taught.

Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not enter, nor will it enter, into the exposition of any phenomenon. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not enter into the exposition of form. It does not enter into the exposition of feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. It does not enter into the exposition of the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, or the mind. It does not enter into the exposition of the elements. It does not enter into the exposition of dependent origination. It does not enter into the exposition of knowledge and liberation. Venerable Śāriputra, even the supramundane wisdom that leads to penetration does not enter into an exposition of the perfection of wisdom. Śāriputra, it is like this: how could a phenomenon that does not enter into the exposition of any phenomenon at all be expressed and expounded? Venerable Śāriputra, those who fully understand the way of phenomena in this manner fully understand the teaching of the perfection of wisdom.

Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not abide in the teaching or the exposition of any phenomenon. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not abide in the teaching or exposition of form. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of name-and-form. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of affliction and purification. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of dependent origination. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of the inverted views. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of the element of sentient beings and the element of self. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the wind element. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of moral discipline and corrupt discipline. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom. It does not abide in the teaching or exposition of the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the bases of miraculous power, the immeasurables, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, the meditative attainments, or the superknowledges.

It does not stand as a teaching or a definitive teaching of the truths, the path, or the result. It does not stand as a teaching or a definitive teaching of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas. It does not stand as a teaching or a definitive teaching of the Dharma of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, or of the Dharma of bodhisattvas. It does not stand as any phenomenon that is known or not known, taught or unteachable. It does not stand as teaching, or as not teaching, the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, or the knowledge of cessation. It does not stand as teaching, or as not teaching, nirvāṇa.

Venerable Śāriputra, how then could one teach the conventional designation of that which does not stand as teaching, or as not teaching, any phenomenon at all? Venerable Śāriputra, whoever understands this kind of teaching, that the perfection of wisdom does not stand as teaching, or as not teaching, any phenomenon at all, knows the perfection of wisdom and also knows the teaching of the perfection of wisdom.

Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom does not stand for the sake of joining with any phenomenon, or for the sake of not joining with it. Why is that? Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom neither joins with form nor refrains from joining with it. Likewise, it neither joins with feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with dependent origination nor refrains from joining with it. It neither joins with the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the wind element nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the element of sentient beings, the element of self, the realm of phenomena (dharmadhātu), and the element of space nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with moral discipline and broken discipline, patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and faulty wisdom, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the applications of mindfulness, the correct abandonments, the bases of miraculous power, the immeasurables, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the samādhis, and the attainments, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the path and the fruit of the path, suffering, origin, and cessation, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the ground of the śrāvakas, the ground of the pratyekabuddhas, and the ground of the bodhisattvas, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the qualities of the śrāvakas, the qualities of the pratyekabuddhas, and the qualities of the bodhisattvas, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with knowledge of the past, the future, and the present, and with the sameness of the three times, nor refrains from joining with them. It neither joins with the unobstructed, the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, and nirvāṇa, nor refrains from joining with them.

Venerable Śāriputra, how then could one teach that which does not stand as joining, or as not joining, with any phenomenon at all? Venerable Śāriputra, I do not truly see any phenomenon about which I might be eloquent, by which I might be eloquent, in which I might be eloquent, or which I might be eloquent in undertaking. It is because I see this point that I have spoken as I did.

This concludes the chapter on Subhūti, the fifth.

Then the Blessed One spoke these words to the bodhisattva great being Supreme Prowess (Suvikrāntavikrama): "Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva great being who practices the perfection of wisdom does not practice any phenomenon at all. Why is that? Suvikrāntavikrama, all phenomena arise from error; they are untrue, nonexistent, false, and unreal. Therefore, Suvikrāntavikrama, whoever practices any phenomenon at all practices error; that is practicing what is unreal.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva is not defined by practicing error or by practicing what is unreal. A bodhisattva who practices error or what is unreal is not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Since in what is erroneous and unreal there is no practice whatsoever, the bodhisattva does not practice it.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, what is called 'error' is what foolish ordinary beings have wrongly grasped. That phenomenon is not as it is grasped, and whatever is not as it has been grasped is called erroneous and unreal. Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva does not practice what is erroneous and unreal. Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva speaks of what is real; he practices what is free of error. Where there is error with regard to the real, there is no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, the complete cutting off of all practices is the practice of a bodhisattva. The practice of a bodhisattva cannot be fully shown by saying, 'This is the practice of a bodhisattva; by this is the practice of a bodhisattva; this is the practice of a bodhisattva; from this is the practice of a bodhisattva,' for the practice of a bodhisattva is not defined in such a way. Bodhisattvas reverse the practice of ordinary beings.

They are the reversal of the conduct of śrāvakas and the reversal of the conduct of pratyekabuddhas, and because they reverse all conduct, they practice the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, these bodhisattvas do not practice even with regard to whatever qualities of a buddha there are, thinking, "These are the qualities of a buddha," "Through this come the qualities of a buddha," "This is the qualities of a buddha," or "These qualities of a buddha belong to this," and they do not cling to them. Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva does not practice in that way. Supreme Prowess, all of these are engagement in conceptual thought. Since the practice of a bodhisattva is the abandonment of all conceptualizing, a bodhisattva practices neither in conceptual thought nor in non-conceptualizing.

Supreme Prowess, what is called conceptualizing is the conceptualizing of phenomena. Since all phenomena are free of conceptual thought, no phenomenon can be examined. Therefore whoever conceptualizes phenomena conceptualizes wrongly. Supreme Prowess, phenomena are neither conceptualizing nor non-conceptualizing. Supreme Prowess, what is called conceptualizing is one extreme; what is called non-conceptualizing is the second extreme. Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva practices neither in extremes nor in the absence of extremes. One who practices neither in extremes nor in the absence of extremes does not see a middle either. Supreme Prowess, if one sees a middle and practices in the middle, one is practicing in an extreme itself. Supreme Prowess, in the middle there is no indication or definitive indication of practice whatsoever.

Supreme Prowess, what is called the middle is a synonym for the noble eightfold path. Supreme Prowess, the noble eightfold path is not present for the sake of apprehending any phenomenon or seeing any phenomenon. Supreme Prowess, when one neither cultivates nor fails to cultivate any phenomenon whatsoever, one is called "one who has cut off the stream of the path." Because he neither cultivates nor fails to cultivate any phenomenon, he passes completely beyond cultivation and finds the sameness of phenomena. If, through that sameness of phenomena, not even the notion of a path arises, how could there be any seeing of a path?

Supreme Prowess, "one who has cut off the stream of the path" is a synonym for a monk whose defilements are exhausted, an arhat. Why is that? Because he has no cultivation of the path, having neither cultivated it nor been without cultivating it, he is therefore called "without cultivation." Since non-cultivation also does not exist for him, he is therefore called "without cultivation." Since he is free of cultivation, he is therefore called "without cultivation." Supreme Prowess, if there were some cultivation or someone who cultivates, it would be apprehended, and he would not be without cultivation. Supreme Prowess, what is called "without cultivation" is non-cultivation because he is free of cultivation; since this is free of entities, it is therefore called "without cultivation," but it is not as it is expressed. Why is that? Non-cultivation is inexpressible. This non-cultivation is freedom. If one asks what freedom is, it is that in which distortions do not arise and that in which what is unreal does not arise.

Supreme Prowess, a distortion does not give rise to a distortion; a distortion is not something that has arisen at all. In it there is nothing whatsoever that gives rise to anything. If there were anything in it that gave rise to something, and one were to speak of it, then it would be called a distortion because it arises from what is unreal.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva realizes all phenomena to be without distortion. Why is that? Because he knows distortion to be unreal. In distortion there is no distortion. Whoever knows that distortion is unreal and that in distortion there is no distortion realizes all phenomena to be undistorted. For one who has realized the absence of distortion, no distortion whatsoever arises. For one in whom there is no distortion, there is no practice whatsoever.

Supreme Prowess, all practices are distortion, because they arise from practice and because of conceptualizing practice. A bodhisattva does not conceptualize practice, and therefore he is said to abide without distortion. One who is without distortion does not practice in anything at all, and therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva. Supreme Prowess, what is called non-practice is not practicing in any phenomenon, not engaging in it at all, and not displaying the characteristic of practice. That is called the practice of a bodhisattva, and whoever practices in this way practices the Perfection of Wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva practices with form as his object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. If he practices with feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness as his object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because he knows all objects to be utterly isolated. In what is isolated there is no practice whatsoever, and therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva practices with the eye as his object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. If he practices with the ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind as his object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because he knows all objects to be unreal. Whoever knows all objects to be unreal does not practice in anything at all, and therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva practices with forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles, or mental phenomena as his object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom.

Why is that? Because he knows that all objects arise from distortion, and he fully understands that what is distorted is not real. One who fully understands distortion as unreal does not course in any object at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva courses in name and form as an object, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because he sees all objects as without object. One who has realized all objects as without object does not course in any object at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattva great beings course in a sentient being or a self as an object, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they know that the perception of a sentient being and the perception of a self are not real. One who knows that the perception of a sentient being and the perception of a self are not real does not practice in any practice at all. One who does not practice in any practice at all is without practice. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva courses in the perception of a life principle, a nourisher, a man, a person, one born of Manu, a son of Manu, an instigator, an initiator, an agent, one who causes action, an experiencer, or in the perception of one who feels, of one who cognizes, or of a knower, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they have demolished all perceptions. Those who have demolished all perceptions no longer course in any perception at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if a bodhisattva courses in distortions, in views, and in obscurations, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. If he courses in distortions, views, and obscurations as objects, he is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they fully understand distortions, views, and obscurations as objects. One who fully understands this is without practice. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who courses in dependent origination as an object is not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they know dependent origination, and they also know dependent origination as an object. For one who knows dependent origination as an object there is no practice at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in the desire realm as an object, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. If they course in the form realm and the formless realm as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they have demolished the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm as objects. For one in whom the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm as objects are demolished, there is no practice at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in moral discipline and corrupt discipline as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they fully understand moral discipline and corrupt discipline as objects. For one who knows moral discipline and corrupt discipline as objects there is no practice at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in patience and malice, in diligence and laziness, in meditative concentration and distraction, in wisdom and corrupt wisdom as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they fully understand all objects. For one who fully understands all objects there is no practice at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in non-distortion, the right efforts, the applications of mindfulness, and the immeasurables as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they know all objects to be hollow. For one who fully understands all objects to be hollow there is no practice at all. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, meditative absorption, and the meditative attainments as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because they have demolished the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, meditative absorption, and the meditative attainments as objects. For one in whom these are demolished there is no practice at all. Therefore what is called non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas course in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path as objects, they are not practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Why is that? Because for them suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path as objects have been demolished.

Whatever is destroyed contains no destruction whatsoever, and it also contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess (Suvikrāntavikrama), if bodhisattvas practice with knowledge and liberation as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish knowledge and liberation as objects of focus. Whatever is destroyed contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with non-arising as their object of focus, or with exhaustion as their object of focus, or with non-formation as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish non-arising, exhaustion and non-formation as objects of focus. Whatever is destroyed also contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with earth, water, fire, wind and space as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish earth, water, fire, wind and space as objects of focus. Whatever is destroyed contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with the grounds of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish the grounds of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas as objects of focus. Whatever is destroyed contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with the qualities of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish the qualities of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas as objects of focus. Whatever is destroyed contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with nirvāṇa as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they fully understand nirvāṇa as an object of focus. Whatever is fully understood contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, if bodhisattvas practice with perfectly pure major marks as their object of focus, or practice with a perfectly pure buddha field as their object of focus, or practice with an excellent assembly of śrāvakas as their object of focus, or practice with an excellent assembly of bodhisattvas as their object of focus, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Why is that? Because they demolish perfectly pure major marks as an object of focus, a perfectly pure buddha field as an object of focus, an excellent assembly of śrāvakas as an object of focus, and an excellent assembly of bodhisattvas as an object of focus. Whatever is destroyed contains no practice whatsoever. Therefore non-practice is called the practice of a bodhisattva.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way is practicing the perfection of wisdom. This is the practice of a bodhisattva practicing the perfection of wisdom that fully understands all objects of focus, the practice that destroys all objects of focus.

Supreme Prowess, when a bodhisattva practices in this way, he does not practice on the purity of form as an object of focus. Likewise, he does not practice on the purity of feeling, perception, formations or consciousness as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that form as an object of focus is pure by its intrinsic nature. Whatever practice is of this kind, that is a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice on the purity of the eye as an object of focus. He does not practice on the purity of the ear, nose, tongue, body or mind as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that everything up to the mind, as an object of focus, is pure by its intrinsic nature. Whatever practice is of this kind, that is a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice on the purity of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles or mental phenomena as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that everything up to mental phenomena, as an object of focus, is pure by its intrinsic nature. Whatever practice is of this kind, that is a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice on the purity of name and form as an object of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that name and form as an object of focus is pure by its intrinsic nature. Whatever practice is of this kind, that is a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice on the purity of self and sentient being as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that self and sentient being as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature. Whatever practice is of this kind, that is a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of a life principle, a creature, a person, an agent, one who causes action, an instigator, a prime instigator, a feeler, one who causes feeling, or a seer as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that a life principle, a creature, a person, an agent, one who causes action, an instigator, a prime instigator, a feeler, one who causes feeling, and a seer as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature. Such practice is the bodhisattva's practice of the Perfection of Wisdom.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of the distortions and of what has become a view as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that the distortions and what has become a view, as objects of focus, are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of the obscurations as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that the obscurations as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of dependent origination as an object of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that dependent origination as an object of focus is pure by its intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of moral discipline and corrupt discipline as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that moral discipline and corrupt discipline as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of the past, the future, and the present as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he fully understands that the past, the future, and the present as objects of focus are pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva great being who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of unobstructedness as an object of focus. Why is that? Because he knows that unobstructedness as an object of focus is completely pure by its intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of the superknowledges as objects of focus. Why is that? Because he knows that the superknowledges as objects of focus are completely pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in the purity of omniscience as an object of focus. Why is that? Because he knows that omniscience as an object of focus is completely pure by its intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way practices the Perfection of Wisdom, and he does not practice in the purity of any object of focus whatsoever. Why is that? Because all objects of focus are completely pure by their intrinsic nature. Suvikrāntavikrama, this is the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom, in which all objects of focus of the bodhisattva great being are completely pure by their intrinsic nature.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not see "this is form," does not see "form by this," does not see "the form of this," does not see "form from this." Since he does not see form in this way, he neither lifts form up nor sets it down; he neither produces form nor stops it; he does not practice in form, nor practice in it in any way. He does not practice in form as an object of focus, nor practice in it in any way.

Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not see "this is feeling," "this is perception," "these are formations," "this is consciousness." He does not see "consciousness by this," does not see "the consciousness of this," does not see "consciousness from this." Since he does not see consciousness in this way, he neither lifts consciousness up nor sets it down; he neither produces consciousness nor stops it; he does not practice in consciousness, nor practice in it in any way. He does not practice in consciousness as an object of focus, nor practice in it in any way. Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way practices the Perfection of Wisdom.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not practice in form as "past," does not practice in form as "future," does not practice in form as "present." Likewise he does not practice in feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as "past," "future," or "present." He does not practice in form as "self," and does not practice in form as "mine."

Likewise, he does not practice in terms of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as "self," and he does not practice in terms of consciousness as "mine." He does not practice in terms of form as "suffering." Likewise, he does not practice in terms of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as "suffering." He does not practice in terms of form as "mine" or "another's." Likewise, he does not practice in terms of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as "mine" or "another's." Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices in this way practices the perfection of wisdom.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom does not practice in the origin of form, and does not practice in the cessation of form. He does not practice in terms of form as "profound," nor as "not profound." He does not practice in terms of form as "empty," nor as "not empty." He does not practice in terms of form as "a sign," nor as "signless." He does not practice in terms of form as "wishing," nor as "wishless." He does not practice in terms of form as "conditioned," nor as "unconditioned." Likewise, he does not practice in the origin of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in the cessation of consciousness. He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "profound," nor as "not profound." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "empty," nor as "not empty." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "a sign," nor as "signless." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "wishing," nor as "wishless." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "conditioned," nor as "unconditioned."

And why is that? Because, Suvikrāntavikrama, all of these have become conceit, and they belong to agitation, to conceptual elaboration, and to craving. The thought "I shall practice" is agitation. The thought "Here I shall practice" is conceptual elaboration. The thought "By this one practices" belongs to craving. The thought "One should practice in this" is conceit.

Therefore, Suvikrāntavikrama, bodhisattvas know that all of these belong to conceit, agitation, conceptual elaboration, and craving. In order to completely destroy all unknowing, they do not conceive of anything at all. Since they do not conceive, they do not practice in anything, and they do not apply themselves to anything. Since these things have no abode, no coming together, and no separation, they do not join anything with anything. This, Suvikrāntavikrama, is the complete destruction of all conceit for bodhisattva great beings who practice the perfection of wisdom.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom in this way does not practice in terms of form as "permanent" or "impermanent." He does not practice in terms of form as "empty" or "not empty." He does not practice in terms of form as "like an illusion." He does not practice in terms of form as "like a dream." He does not practice in terms of form as "like a mirage." He does not practice in terms of form as "like an echo." Likewise, he does not practice in terms of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as "permanent" or "impermanent." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "empty" or "not empty." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "like an illusion." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "like a dream." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "like a mirage." He does not practice in terms of consciousness as "like an echo."

And why is that? Because, Suvikrāntavikrama, all of these are not conceptual examination, investigation, practice, or thorough practice. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva, knowing that all of these are not conceptual examination, investigation, practice, or thorough practice, practices the perfection of wisdom in order to completely overcome all practices and to fully understand all practices. This, Suvikrāntavikrama, is what is taught as the practice of a bodhisattva.

When the Blessed One had spoken thus, the bodhisattva great being Suvikrāntavikrama said to him, "This practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable."

The Blessed One declared, "So it is, Suvikrāntavikrama. Because form is inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Likewise, because feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Because name and form are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Because dependent origination is inconceivable and affliction is inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Because the karmic maturation of actions is inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Because the distorted views are inconceivable and wrong views are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable. Because the desire realm is inconceivable, and the form realm and the formless realm are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by bodhisattvas is inconceivable."

Because the self is inconceivable, sentient beings are inconceivable, generosity is inconceivable, stinginess is inconceivable, moral discipline is inconceivable, broken discipline is inconceivable, patience is inconceivable, malice is inconceivable, diligence is inconceivable, laziness is inconceivable, meditative concentration is inconceivable, distraction is inconceivable, wisdom is inconceivable, and faulty wisdom is inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because attachment, aversion, and delusion are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because the applications of mindfulness are inconceivable, and the correct exertions, the absence of inversion, the immeasurables, and the bases of miraculous power are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is also inconceivable. Because the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path are inconceivable, this perfection of wisdom of a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because knowledge and liberation are inconceivable, and the knowledge of exhaustion, the knowledge of non-arising, and the knowledge of non-formation are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because the grounds of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because the qualities of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable. Because the superknowledges are inconceivable, and the past, the future, and the present are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable.

The fifth fascicle.

Because unobstructed wisdom is inconceivable, nirvāṇa is inconceivable, and the qualities of a buddha are inconceivable, this practice of the perfection of wisdom by a bodhisattva is inconceivable.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because a bodhisattva's practice of the perfection of wisdom is not a giving rise to thought; therefore it is called inconceivable. Supreme Prowess, what is called "giving rise to thought" is an inversion. Supreme Prowess, what is called "mind" is the thorough comprehension of mind. Supreme Prowess, whatever is the intrinsic nature of mind has neither arising nor origination. Supreme Prowess, a mind endowed with inversion arises; there the mind is unobscured, and yet the inversion by which it is produced is not unobscured. Supreme Prowess, childish ordinary beings do not know that the mind is unobscured, that that in which it arises is also unobscured, and that that by which it is produced is also unobscured. They do not know that the mind is isolated, and they do not know that the object is isolated, and so they cling, thinking "my mind," "this one's mind," "mind from this."

Because they cling to these, they cling to "virtuous," they cling to "nonvirtuous," they cling to "pleasant," they cling to "painful," they cling to "annihilation," they cling to "permanence," they cling to "views," they cling to "obscuration," they cling to "moral discipline" and "broken discipline," they cling to "the desire realm," "the form realm," and "the formless realm," they cling to "dependent origination," they cling to "name and form," they cling to "attachment," "aversion," and "delusion," they cling to "jealousy" and "stinginess," they cling to "the pride that thinks I am," they cling to "suffering," they cling to "origin," they cling to "cessation," they cling to "the path," they cling to "the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the absence of inversion, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, and the factors of awakening," they cling to "the meditative concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments," they cling to "non-arising, exhaustion, and non-formation," they cling to "the grounds of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas," they cling also to the qualities of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, they cling also to the superknowledges, they cling also to nirvāṇa, they cling also to the wisdom of a buddha, they cling also to signs, they cling also to buddha fields, they cling also to the excellence of śrāvakas, and they cling also to the excellence of bodhisattvas.

Supreme Prowess, the bodhisattva, having seen that such clingings as these arise from the inverted minds of sentient beings, does not give rise to thought toward any inversion at all. Why is that? Because the perfection of wisdom is free from mind. Supreme Prowess, where mind is by nature luminous and by nature completely pure, there is no giving rise to thought whatsoever. Supreme Prowess, because there is an object, childish ordinary beings give rise to thought. The bodhisattva, however, thoroughly understands the object, and, asking "From where does mind arise?", thoroughly understands the arising of mind as well. Therefore he reflects, thinking, "This mind is by nature luminous," and he thinks, "Mind arises in dependence on an object." Because he fully understands the object, he neither gives rise to thought nor stops it; his mind is luminous, not thoroughly afflicted, delightful, and completely pure. Because he abides in the non-arising of mind, he neither produces nor stops any phenomenon whatsoever.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, this is the full understanding of arising of a bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom. A bodhisattva who practices in this way practices the perfection of wisdom. Such a bodhisattva does not think, 'Those who practice thus practice the perfection of wisdom,' or 'Here one practices the perfection of wisdom,' or 'By this one practices the perfection of wisdom,' or 'From this one practices the perfection of wisdom.' If one conceives, 'This is the perfection of wisdom,' or 'By this is the perfection of wisdom,' or 'This is its perfection of wisdom,' or 'From this is the perfection of wisdom,' then one is not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Not seeing at all, and not apprehending, even that perfection of wisdom about which one thinks, 'I practice the perfection of wisdom': that is practicing the perfection of wisdom."

When he had said this, the bodhisattva, the great being Suvikrāntavikrama, said to the Blessed One (the Buddha), "Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom is unsurpassed. Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom is luminous. Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom has nothing above it. Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom is preeminent. Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom is invincible. It cannot be overcome by Māra, by Māra's retinue, or by anyone else at all: by anyone who engages in signs, who engages in apprehending objects, who holds a view of a self, a view of a sentient being, a view of a life, a view of a person, a view of annihilation, a view of permanence, a view of the aggregates, a view of the elements, a view of the sense sources, a view of the Buddha, a view of the Dharma, a view of the Saṅgha, or a view of passing into nirvāṇa, by anyone who perceives attainment, who is conceited, who engages in attachment, aversion, and delusion, who engages in error, or who is established on a wrong path. Blessed One, this practice of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom is preeminent above the whole world."

When he had said this, the Blessed One said to the bodhisattva, the great being Suvikrāntavikrama, "So it is. Suvikrāntavikrama, so it is. This bodhisattva cannot be overcome by Māra, by the gods of Māra's class, or by Māra's retinue. He cannot be overcome even by any of the childish ordinary beings who hold a view of passing into nirvāṇa or who are attached to nirvāṇa. Suvikrāntavikrama, this is the practice of bodhisattvas; it is not the practice of any ordinary beings. Nor is it the practice of those still in training, of those beyond training, of followers of the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or of followers of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. Suvikrāntavikrama, if it were the practice of followers of the Śrāvaka Vehicle or of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, then there would be no such designation for them as 'follower of the Śrāvaka Vehicle' or 'follower of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.' They would be bodhisattvas themselves, and they would become tathāgatas who have attained the four fearlessnesses. But, Suvikrāntavikrama, this way of practicing does not belong to followers of the Śrāvaka Vehicle, nor to followers of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. Therefore they are not counted as bodhisattvas, nor do they become tathāgatas who have attained the four fearlessnesses. Suvikrāntavikrama, this practice of the perfection of wisdom is the ground of fearlessness.

"Suvikrāntavikrama, bodhisattvas who practice in this way, even though they have not yet fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, quickly attain the four fearlessnesses through the power of their aspiration and through the power of the blessing of the buddhas, the blessed ones. Suvikrāntavikrama, followers of the Śrāvaka Vehicle and followers of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle do not have the four fearlessnesses, and the Tathāgata does not bless them with the four fearlessnesses. Suvikrāntavikrama, that in which the four fearlessnesses are attained through the power of aspiration is the ground of the bodhisattva. Why is that? Suvikrāntavikrama, it is because bodhisattvas of the perfection of wisdom attain the four discriminating knowledges (pratisaṃvid). What are the four? They are the discriminating knowledge of meaning, the discriminating knowledge of phenomena, the discriminating knowledge of definitive language, and the discriminating knowledge of eloquence. Endowed with these four, even though they have not yet fully awakened, they take hold of the four fearlessnesses through the power of aspiration. And the Tathāgata, knowing that they possess roots of virtue and knowing that they have also attained the ground of the perfection of wisdom, blesses them with the four fearlessnesses. Therefore, Suvikrāntavikrama, if a bodhisattva wishes to attain the four discriminating knowledges and wishes quickly to become skilled in the four fearlessnesses, he should train in the perfection of wisdom; he should practice it.

"Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, a bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom fully understands the cause, the origin, the disappearance, and the cessation of all phenomena, and he does not attach any phenomenon whatever to the perfection of wisdom."

Fully understanding the cause, the origin, the cessation, the path, and the characteristic of all phenomena, the bodhisattva neither cultivates form nor refrains from cultivating it. Likewise, they neither cultivate feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate name and form nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate affliction and purification nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the inverted views (viparyāsas), the obscurations, and what has become a view nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate attachment, aversion, and delusion nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the element of sentient beings and the element of self nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the view of annihilation and the view of permanence nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate generosity and miserliness, moral discipline and faulty discipline, patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and faulty wisdom, nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the absence of inversion, the bases of miraculous power, and the immeasurables nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate dependent origination nor refrain from cultivating it. They neither cultivate suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, and the knowledge of non-formation nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the ground of ordinary beings, the ground of the śrāvakas, the ground of the pratyekabuddhas, and the ground of the bodhisattvas nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate the qualities of ordinary beings, the qualities of the śrāvakas, the qualities of the pratyekabuddhas, the qualities of the bodhisattvas, and the qualities of the buddhas nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate calm abiding and insight nor refrain from cultivating them. They neither cultivate nirvāṇa nor refrain from cultivating it. They neither cultivate the seeing of past, future, and present wisdom nor refrain from cultivating it. They neither cultivate the unobstructed nor refrain from cultivating it. They neither cultivate the wisdom of the buddhas and the fearlessnesses of the buddhas nor refrain from cultivating them.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because form, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are not things to be cultivated. It is because name and form, the inversions, what has become a view, the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, the meditative attainments, the superknowledges, the knowledge of exhaustion, the superknowledges, and the knowledge of non-formation are not things to be cultivated. It is because the ground of ordinary beings, the ground of the śrāvakas, the ground of the pratyekabuddhas, and the ground of the bodhisattvas are not things to be cultivated. It is because the qualities of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas are not things to be cultivated. It is because nirvāṇa is not a thing to be cultivated. It is because the seeing of past, future, and present wisdom is not a thing to be cultivated. It is because unobstructed wisdom is not a thing to be cultivated. It is because even the wisdom of the perfectly complete Buddha is not a thing to be cultivated.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, because there is no thoroughly established entity whatsoever, all these conventional designations are unreal, and in them there is no essential nature at all. Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are unreal and have not come into being; their nature is that of a nonentity. Why is that? Whatever is inversion is unreal, because all phenomena arise from inversion. Whatever is inversion is unreal. Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are nonentities; because they have no intrinsic nature, no entity is apprehended. Supreme Prowess, what is called "nonentity" is unreal and has not come into being; therefore it is called "nonentity." Supreme Prowess, what is called "nonentity" is only an exposition. Where there is no entity, there is neither cultivation nor non-cultivation. Supreme Prowess, since sentient beings arise from inversion, they are neither cultivated nor left uncultivated, for in them there is no entity whatsoever. Why is that? Supreme Prowess, because all phenomena are nonentities, their nature is that of a nonentity; since they are devoid of entity, there is nothing here whatsoever to be cultivated.

Supreme Prowess, when a bodhisattva abides observing these phenomena in accordance with the Dharma, practices the perfection of wisdom, and neither cultivates any phenomenon nor refrains from cultivating it, that is called practicing the Perfection of Wisdom. Supreme Prowess, when one practices in this way and abides in this way, the bodhisattva's cultivation of the Perfection of Wisdom becomes complete.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva great being who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not give rise to a thought that would be a cause for meeting with form.

Nor does he give rise to a mind that is a cause for meeting with feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of wickedness. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of ill will. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of stinginess. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of thorough affliction. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of laziness. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of distraction. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of corrupted wisdom. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of contact with sense desires. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to form as an object. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of covetousness. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of slander. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of wrong view. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to wealth. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to power. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to birth in a family of great wealth. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to birth as a god. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to the desire realm. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to the form and formless realms. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of the level of the śrāvakas. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of the level of the pratyekabuddhas. He does not give rise to a mind possessed of clinging to the conduct of a bodhisattva. He does not even give rise to a mind possessed of a view of nirvāṇa.

Endowed with this purified mind, he pervades sentient beings with loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity. He has demolished the perception of beings as beings, and so he does not dwell even in the perception of beings, nor does he cling even to those four abodes of Brahmā. Because he is endowed with skill in means, for one who possesses those qualities of the Perfection of Wisdom and practices the Perfection of Wisdom, the cultivation of the Perfection of Wisdom will quickly be brought to completion.

One who cultivates the Perfection of Wisdom in this way neither accepts nor grasps form. He neither accepts nor grasps feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. He neither accepts nor grasps the distortions, the obscurations, or views. He neither accepts nor grasps the desire realm, the form realm, or the formless realm. He neither accepts nor grasps annihilation or permanence. He neither accepts nor grasps dependent origination. He neither accepts nor grasps the elements of earth, water, fire, and wind. He neither accepts nor grasps attachment, aversion, or delusion. He neither accepts nor grasps the element of space. He neither accepts nor grasps moral discipline or corrupted discipline. He neither accepts nor grasps patience or ill will, diligence or laziness, meditative concentration or distraction, wisdom or corrupted wisdom. He neither accepts nor grasps the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the immeasurables, or the bases of miraculous power. He neither accepts nor grasps the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, meditative absorption, or the meditative attainments. He neither accepts nor grasps the superknowledges. He neither accepts nor grasps suffering, its origin, its cessation, or the path. He neither accepts nor grasps the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, or non-formation. He neither accepts nor grasps the element of self, the element of beings, or the sphere of reality. He neither accepts nor grasps ordinary beings, śrāvakas, or pratyekabuddhas. He neither accepts nor grasps the qualities of ordinary beings, of śrāvakas, or of pratyekabuddhas. He neither accepts nor grasps the knowledge and vision of the past, the future, or the present. He neither accepts nor grasps unobstructed knowledge and vision. He neither accepts nor grasps the wisdom of the buddhas, their powers, or their fearlessnesses. He neither accepts nor grasps obscuration.

And why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because all phenomena are without acceptance and without grasping, since they have not been accepted by anyone at all. Supreme Prowess, there is no phenomenon whatsoever to be grasped, and no one has grasped any. And why is that? Because in them there is nothing at all to be grasped or that could be grasped. And why is that? Because all phenomena are like an illusion, they are without essence. Because no essence is found in them, all phenomena are insubstantial. Because they cannot be grasped, all phenomena are like an optical illusion. Because they have no intrinsic nature, all phenomena are hollow. Because they cannot withstand pressure, all phenomena are like a lump of foam. Because they arise and then perish and dissolve, all phenomena are like bubbles on water. Because they arise from distortion, all phenomena are like a mirage. Because they are without essence, all phenomena are like the core of a plantain tree. Because they cannot be grasped, all phenomena are like the moon in water. Because they are imagined where nothing exists, all phenomena are like a rainbow. Because they do not arise at all, all phenomena are unmoving. Because they are conceived upon a nature that is insubstantial, all phenomena are like a sheer void.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who thus truly sees all phenomena accordingly neither accepts nor grasps anything at all. He does not settle upon anything, nor does he dwell in attachment to it. Supreme Prowess, this is, for a bodhisattva practicing the Perfection of Wisdom, faith with regard to all phenomena, non-abiding, freedom from excessive attachment, and non-clinging. Supreme Prowess, for a bodhisattva who practices in this way, the cultivation of the Perfection of Wisdom will be brought to completion.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who trains in this way does not train in form, nor does he train in order to transcend form. He does not train in feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, nor does he train in order to transcend feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not train in the arising of form, and he does not train in the cessation of form. He does not train in the arising of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and he does not train in the cessation of consciousness. He does not train for the sake of removing or not removing form. He does not train for the sake of removing or not removing feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. Nor does he train for the sake of transcending form, entering it, abiding in it, or not abiding in it. Nor does he train for the sake of transcending feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, entering them, abiding in them, or not abiding in them.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who trains in this way does not train in form as permanent, nor in form as pleasant, form as beautiful, or form as a self. He does not train in feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as permanent, nor in consciousness as pleasant, consciousness as beautiful, or consciousness as a self.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who trains in this way does not practice with past form as an object, does not practice with future form as an object, and does not practice with present form as an object. He does not practice with past feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as an object, does not practice with them as future objects, and does not practice with them as present objects.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way examines the past in its aspect of emptiness, its aspect of peace, and its aspect of selflessness, yet he does not practice in such a way as to think, "Whatever is past is empty, peaceful, and selfless." He examines the future in its aspect of emptiness, its aspect of peace, and its aspect of selflessness, yet he does not practice in such a way as to think, "Whatever is future is empty and selfless." He examines the present in its aspect of emptiness, its aspect of peace, and its aspect of selflessness, yet he does not practice in such a way as to think, "Whatever is present is empty and selfless." Nor does he practice in such a way as to think of the past, "It is empty, or a self, or mine, or permanent, or stable, or everlasting, or of an unchanging nature." Nor does he practice in such a way as to think of the future, "It is empty, or a self, or mine, or permanent, or stable, or everlasting, or of an unchanging nature." Nor does he practice in such a way as to think of the present, "It is empty, or a self, or mine, or permanent, or stable, or everlasting, or of an unchanging nature."

Supreme Prowess, the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom of a bodhisattva who practices in this way becomes complete. Supreme Prowess, Māra the Evil One finds no opportunity against a bodhisattva who practices in this way. One who practices in this way understands all the deeds of Māra, and so is not carried away by those deeds of Māra.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not apprehend form. He does not apprehend feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not apprehend the inverted notions and views. He does not apprehend clinging to a self. He does not apprehend clinging to a sentient being. He does not apprehend annihilation and permanence. He does not apprehend an end and endlessness. He does not apprehend forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles. He does not apprehend the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm. He does not apprehend dependent origination. He does not apprehend the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, and space. He does not apprehend truth and falsehood. He does not apprehend union and separation. He does not apprehend attachment, aversion, and delusion. He does not apprehend the abandoning of attachment, aversion, and delusion. He does not apprehend moral discipline and corrupt discipline. He does not apprehend patience and malice. He does not apprehend diligence and laziness. He does not apprehend meditative concentration and distraction. He does not apprehend wisdom and corrupt wisdom. He does not apprehend the applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the bases of miraculous power, and the inverted notions. He does not apprehend the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments. He does not apprehend loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity. He does not apprehend the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, and the knowledge of non-formation. He does not apprehend the grounds of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas. He does not apprehend the qualities of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas. He does not apprehend origin, cessation, and the path. He does not apprehend the higher knowledges and the knowledge and vision. He does not apprehend liberation. He does not apprehend the knowledge and vision of liberation. He does not apprehend nirvāṇa. He does not apprehend the knowledge and vision of the past, the future, and the present. He does not apprehend unobstructed wisdom. He does not apprehend the wisdom of the buddhas. He does not apprehend the powers and fearlessnesses of the buddhas. He does not apprehend the purity of a buddha field. He does not apprehend the purity of the major marks. He does not apprehend the excellence of śrāvakas. He does not apprehend the excellence of pratyekabuddhas. He does not apprehend the excellence of bodhisattvas.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, among all phenomena there is no grasping whatsoever whereby these could be apprehended, because all phenomena are without apprehension.

Supreme Prowess, as long as there is apprehension, so long will there be excessive attachment; so long will there be clinging; so long will there be grasping; so long will there be suffering and unhappiness; so long will there arise the unbearable dart of sorrow, agitation, and lamentation. Supreme Prowess, as long as there is apprehension, so long is there bondage. So long is there no path. So long is there suffering and unhappiness. As long as there is apprehension, so long is there conceit, wavering, and conceptual elaboration.

As long as there is apprehending, there is fighting, quarreling, and dispute. As long as there is apprehending, there is the darkness of ignorance, and there is delusion. As long as there is apprehending, there is fear; for that long there is terror. As long as there is apprehending, there is the noose of Māra, and one is crushed by Māra. As long as there is apprehending, one is sorely afflicted by suffering and goes searching everywhere for happiness.

Supreme Prowess, having seen these drawbacks, the bodhisattva therefore does not apprehend any phenomenon at all. Because he does not apprehend, he does not grasp any phenomenon. He does not abide in grasping or clinging to any phenomena. Nor does he become conceited about non-apprehending, or about unreliable apprehending.

Supreme Prowess, the bodhisattva great being who practices in this way does not cling to any phenomenon and does not delight in any phenomenon. He does not dwell in excessive attachment to any phenomenon. Supreme Prowess, this is the freedom from apprehending all phenomena of a bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, for the bodhisattva who practices in this way, the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom becomes complete. Wicked Māra, the gods of Māra's class, Māra's retinue, and those empowered by Māra cannot create obstacles for him. They will find no opening through which to disparage him, nor any through which to seize him and bring him under their control. He will always understand all the deeds of Māra, and he will not fall under the power of Māra's deeds. He puts all the abodes of Māra to shame. He will remain in order to refute all the non-Buddhists (tīrthikas). He will overpower all the non-Buddhist ascetics and wanderers. He will not be overcome by any opponent.

Supreme Prowess, the bodhisattva who practices in this way does not abide in conceptualizing form or in not conceptualizing it. Likewise, he does not abide in conceptualizing or not conceptualizing feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not conceptualize form, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize obscurations and wrong views, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize annihilation and permanence, nor does he not conceptualize them.

He does not conceptualize the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize attachment, aversion, and delusion, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize truth, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize falsehood, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize the elements of earth, water, fire, and wind, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize coming together and separating, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize dependent origination, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize the perception of a self, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize the perception of a sentient being, the perception of a life, or the perception of a person, nor does he not conceptualize them.

He does not conceptualize generosity and stinginess, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize moral discipline and corrupt discipline, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize patience and malice, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize diligence and laziness, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize meditative concentration and distraction, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize wisdom and corrupt wisdom, nor does he not conceptualize them.

He does not conceptualize the non-inverted, the right efforts, the bases of miraculous power, and the applications of mindfulness, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, meditative absorption, and the meditative attainments, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize suffering, its origin, cessation, and the path, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, and the knowledge of the unconditioned, nor does he not conceptualize them.

He does not conceptualize the qualities of ordinary beings, the qualities of śrāvakas, the qualities of pratyekabuddhas, and the qualities of buddhas, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize the ground of ordinary beings, the ground of śrāvakas, the ground of pratyekabuddhas, and the ground of buddhas, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize obscurations, nor does he not conceptualize them.

He does not conceptualize the knowledge and vision of the past, the future, and the present, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize unobstructed wisdom, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize knowledge and liberation, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize the knowledge and vision of liberation, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize the knowledge and vision of a buddha and the fearlessnesses, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize the perfectly pure major marks, nor does he not conceptualize them. He does not conceptualize a perfectly pure buddhafield, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize an excellent assembly of śrāvakas, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize an excellent assembly of pratyekabuddhas, nor does he not conceptualize it. He does not conceptualize an excellent assembly of bodhisattvas, nor does he not conceptualize it.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because if there were conceptualization, there would come to be separation from conceptualization. Supreme Prowess, where there is no conceptualization, there is no non-conceptualization either.

Supreme Prowess, all childish ordinary beings arise from conceptualization. Because their perceptions arise from wrong conceptualization, they neither conceptualize nor refrain from conceptualizing. Supreme Prowess, what is called "conceptualizing" is one extreme, and what is called "not conceptualizing" is the second extreme. Where there is neither conceptualizing nor not conceptualizing, there is neither extreme nor middle. Supreme Prowess, if one conceives of something called "the middle," that too is an extreme. As long as there is conceptualizing, there is also not conceptualizing, and in that, conceptualization is not cut off. Supreme Prowess, where there is no conceptualizing and also no not conceptualizing, there conceptualization is completely cut off.

Supreme Prowess, in what is called "the cutting off of conceptualization" there is no cutting off whatsoever. Why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because conceptualizing and not conceptualizing arise from error, and so they do not exist. Their complete pacification is not an error, and in it there is no cutting off whatsoever. Supreme Prowess, what is called "no cutting off" is a synonym for the complete cutting off of suffering, yet there is no complete cutting off of suffering whatsoever. If there were a complete cutting off of suffering, then some suffering would have to be truly established. What is called "the complete cutting off of suffering" is seeing that nothing is truly established. What is called "the complete cutting off of suffering" is the full understanding of suffering. Neither conceptualizing about suffering nor not conceptualizing about it is the complete pacification of suffering. That is the non-arising and non-occurrence of suffering.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who sees in this way neither conceptualizes nor refrains from conceptualizing any phenomenon at all. Supreme Prowess, this is how a bodhisattva practicing the Perfection of Wisdom fully understands all conceptualizing and not conceptualizing. Supreme Prowess, when a bodhisattva practices in this way, his cultivation of the Perfection of Wisdom becomes complete. The evil Māra and the retinue of Māra will not remain there to create obstacles for him. He will also understand the deeds of Māra that occur and arise, and he will not fall under the power of the deeds of Māra that occur and arise. He defeats the evil Māra. He humbles him and diminishes his faction. He will be free of fear and terror. He will not be subdued by Māra. All his going to the lower realms will be cut off. He will block the bad paths. He will cross over all the floods. He will be free of the darkness of delusion. Having gained the eye, he will be a light for all sentient beings. He will abide without severing the lineage of the buddhas. Through the sameness of the path, he will cut off the stream of paths. He will feel compassion for all sentient beings. His eye for the Dharma will be purified. Free of laziness, he will be perfect in diligence. Having no thought of malice, he will attain patience. As a meditator who does not abide in anything, he will be a true meditator. Endowed with the wisdom of definitive realization, he will attain wisdom. He will be without obscuration and free of remorse. He will be free of all the snares of Māra. Being free of all the nets of craving, his bonds will be cut. Being without forgetfulness, he will have mindfulness closely established. Having attained the perfection of complete purity of moral discipline, his moral discipline will be pure. Having removed all faults, he will abide in good qualities. Being unshakable, he will find the generation of the power of wisdom. He will not be overpowered by any opponent. Having attained the perfection of the purity of all phenomena, he will never fall away from the Dharma. He will be without timidity in teaching the Dharma. He will be without embarrassment in entering an assembly. In the gift of the Dharma he will be without grasping and will give freely. Through the even path, he will purify the path. Through fully understanding the bad paths, he will have accomplished cultivation. Through the purity of phenomena, he will cultivate habitual tendencies. Through the purity of wisdom, he will have purified what is to be purified. Being like the ocean, his wisdom will be profound. Being without timidity, his depth will be hard to fathom. Because the ocean of the Dharma is immeasurable, he will be immeasurable. Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way possesses these qualities and others as well; their qualities cannot be fathomed.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom in this way will not lack a good form, will not lack wealth, will not lack servants, will not lack a clan, will not lack a family line, and will not lack a homeland. He will not be born in a borderland, and he will not meet with unfavorable circumstances. He will not associate with impure beings whose courses of action are impure. He will not abandon his own mind, and his wisdom will not decline, for whatever teaching he hears from others he joins with the sameness of all phenomena. He will abide without severing the lineage of the buddhas and the lineage of omniscience. He will gain illumination regarding the qualities of a buddha. He will come close to omniscience.

If the evil Māra should come to scorn him in this way, he will cut off their confidence and cut through all the snares of Māra, and he will crush Māra together with his retinue into dust. Even all the ten million māras of Māra's ranks will not subdue him; rather, the māras, frightened and terrified by him, will flee. The evil Māra thinks: "He has gone far beyond my domain. He no longer acts within my domain. He no longer abides in my domain. He will no longer remain in my domain. He also frees other sentient beings from my domain; he liberates them." So he thinks, and the bodhisattva diminishes his faction.

thinking this, they grieve, weeping and crying out in lament. Dejected, they suffer and are unhappy, and their minds are tormented.

Supreme Prowess, when a bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, cultivates the perfection of wisdom, and applies himself to the perfection of wisdom, then all the abodes of Māra lose their splendor and grow dim. Māra the Evil One thinks, "This one will rescue beings from my domain. This one will ferry beings across, out of my domain. This one will bring beings to complete liberation from my domain. This one will lead beings out of my domain. This one will cut the snare of Māra. This one will pull out the beings who are sunk in the swamp of desire. This one will free beings from the net of views. This one will draw beings away from the path of obscurations. This one will establish beings on the true path. This one will rescue beings from the thicket of views." Thinking this, he suffers and is unhappy; he is pierced by the thorn of sorrow, stabbed by a great thorn of sorrow. Supreme Prowess, seeing this turn of events, those Māras suffer and are unhappy, pierced by the thorn of sorrow.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. A man who has lost a great heap of wealth suffers; he is joyless and filled with great unhappiness. In the same way, when a bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, cultivates the perfection of wisdom, and applies himself to the perfection of wisdom, Māra the Evil One is unhappy at heart, tormented in mind, and pierced by the thorn of sorrow; he suffers and takes no joy even in his own abode.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, the evil Māras gather together and think, "How shall we act? What shall we do?" and they are pierced by doubt and by the thorn of sorrow. Pierced by doubt and by the thorn of sorrow, they go to seek an opening against the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom. Yet there not a single hair of the bodhisattva stirs, let alone any change in his body or mind; he remains free of fear and of bristling hair. He also recognizes that it is Māra the Evil One, and having recognized him, he overpowers him. Overpowered by him, Māra the Evil One is crushed; he becomes afraid and disheartened. Unable to find any opening against him, he thinks, "If even I am unable to find an opening against him, what need is there to speak of my retinue? How could others ever overpower him?" Therefore those evil Māras, afraid and with their zeal utterly broken, filled with suffering and unhappiness, go back to their own abodes and sit there brooding, thinking, "We cannot cloud the mind of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom even for as long as a snap of the fingers, let alone create any other obstacle for him."

Supreme Prowess, this is how, by practicing the perfection of wisdom, a bodhisattva develops such might of wisdom. Possessing such might of wisdom, even if all the beings of the great trichiliocosm, the world system of a billion worlds, were to become Māras, and all of them together with many Māras of their retinues were to come with the intention of harming the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom, Supreme Prowess, all those evil Māras would be unable to create an obstacle. Why is that? Because at that time the bodhisattva possesses such might of wisdom, the sword of wisdom, and the weapon of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, at that time the bodhisattva comes to possess wisdom that is inconceivable, immeasurable, and equal to the unequaled. Therefore Māra the Evil One cannot overwhelm him. Supreme Prowess, it is like this: that weapon of the perfection of wisdom is a great weapon. Supreme Prowess, it is like this: that sword of wisdom is a great sword; it is not the domain of the evil Māras, it is not their sphere of activity.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. Even the ordinary wisdom of a bodhisattva is not the domain, not the sphere of activity, of those non-Buddhist sages who have attained the four meditative concentrations and the four formless absorptions, and who, passing beyond the desire realm, which is the domain of Māra, are born in the Brahma world and in the four classes of formless gods. How much less so the wisdom of one who practices the perfection of wisdom! How could what is not the domain of the form and formless realms be the domain of the evil Māras?

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who has gained such might comes at that time to possess great power, namely the power of the perfection of wisdom. Supreme Prowess, those who come to possess the power of the perfection of wisdom and the sharp weapon of wisdom cannot be assailed or overcome by the evil Māras. Supreme Prowess, those who possess the power of wisdom and the sharp weapon of wisdom do not abide in anything at all; they are without abiding. Why is that? Supreme Prowess, if one abides, one moves. If one moves, one wavers. If one wavers, one falls into conceptual elaboration. Supreme Prowess, those who abide, who move, who waver, and who elaborate fall under the power of Māra the Evil One, and they are not freed from the snare of Māra.

Suvikrāntavikrama, the beings born at the peak of existence who dwell there, bound to an abode and attached to an abode, also come within the domain of Māra. Such were Udraka Rāmaputra and Ārāḍa Kālāma. All the others who dwell in the formless realm, bound to an abode and attached to an abode, are likewise not fully freed from Māra's noose; they are fenced in by Māra's noose.

Suvikrāntavikrama, when a bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, cultivates the perfection of wisdom, and applies himself to the perfection of wisdom, he does not abide in anything; he does not abide anywhere at all.

Suvikrāntavikrama, when a bodhisattva dwells endowed with the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom, he does not abide in form. He does not abide in feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. He does not abide in the inverted views, in the obscurations, or in wrong views. He does not abide in name and form. He does not abide in the desire realm, the form realm, or the formless realm. He does not abide in the notion of a self or of a sentient being. He does not abide in a life-force, a person, the elements, or the sense sources. He does not abide in earth, water, fire, wind, space, consciousness, or the sense base of neither perception nor non-perception. He does not abide in craving for existence. He does not abide in craving for nonexistence. He does not abide in annihilation or permanence. He does not abide in the finite or the infinite. He does not abide in dependent origination.

He does not abide in generosity or stinginess. He does not abide in moral discipline or faulty discipline. He does not abide in patience or malice. He does not abide in diligence or laziness. He does not abide in meditative concentration or distraction. He does not abide in wisdom or faulty wisdom. He does not abide in the inverted views, the right efforts, the immeasurables, or the applications of mindfulness. He does not abide in the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, or the attainments. He does not abide in suffering, its origin, its cessation, or the path. He does not abide in the knowledge of non-arising, the knowledge of exhaustion, or the knowledge of non-formation. He does not abide in knowledge or liberation. He does not abide in liberation or in the knowledge and vision of liberation. He does not abide in the stage of ordinary beings, of śrāvakas, or of pratyekabuddhas. He does not abide in the qualities of ordinary beings, the qualities of śrāvakas, the qualities of pratyekabuddhas, or the qualities of buddhas. He does not abide in nirvāṇa. He does not abide in the past, the future, the present, or the unobstructed. He does not abide in the sameness of the three times. He does not abide in the wisdom, powers, and fearlessnesses of a buddha. He does not abide in omniscient wisdom. He does not abide in the perfection of the major marks. He does not abide in the perfection of a buddha field. He does not abide in the perfection of a śrāvaka assembly. He does not abide in the perfection of an array of bodhisattvas. He does not abide in any phenomenon at all; he is unmoving, utterly unmoving.

He does not abide in searching through all abodes; he does not cling even to the path, nor does he grow conceited about non-abiding. He does not apprehend, "This is the abode." He does not apprehend, "He abides here." He does not apprehend, "This is the abode of that." He does not grow conceited. He does not apprehend, "He abides by means of this." He is not conceited about any abode. Because he does not apprehend and does not cling, he does not approach any abode, does not point to any, does not delight in any, and does not dwell in any with attachment; he is not stained by any abode. Because he is unattached, he attains the purity of all abodes.

Suvikrāntavikrama, this is the knowledge and vision of the purity of the abode of all phenomena of the bodhisattva who practices the perfection of wisdom. Because of it the evil Māras find no opportunity against him, the evil Māras cannot overcome him, and the evil Māras are themselves overwhelmed.

This was the sixth chapter, called Conduct.

The sixth fascicle, which is the last.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, even before a bodhisattva has generated the mind set on unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, he will from the very outset have accomplished many accumulations of roots of virtue. He will have served many buddhas. He will have questioned many buddhas. He will have performed service for the buddhas, the blessed ones. He will be perfect in superior intention. He will delight in giving gifts. He will make pure moral discipline his chief concern. He will be perfect in patience and gentleness. He will be endowed with diligence. He will make pure meditative concentration his chief concern. He will be endowed with wisdom. He will make pure wisdom his chief concern.

Having generated the mind set on unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, he exerts himself in the perfection of wisdom, and with that power of wisdom and power of gnosis he lays his blessing upon the evil Māras, thinking, "May the evil Māra in no way find an opportunity against me! May he not harm me!" Because of his blessing, Māra finds no opportunity and does not draw near him in order to create obstacles; he does not even form the thought, "I will look for faults in that bodhisattva or mock him." Should they set their minds on creating obstacles, they clearly realize that great suffering would befall them because of it, and great fear comes over them. They think, "Surely we would perish," and becoming disheartened, their mocking intent turns back, and those resolves of theirs fade away.

Suvikrāntavikrama, in this way, though the evil Māras draw near a bodhisattva in order to create obstacles, they find no opening to create obstacles.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, when the Perfection of Wisdom is being taught, the bodhisattva will give rise to aspiration, superior intention, respect, and a wish to serve, and will regard the one teaching it as the Teacher. When a discourse connected with the six perfections is spoken, he will not give rise to doubt, uncertainty, or hesitation. When he hears the profound Dharma, he will not become confused, doubtful, or uncertain. He will never accumulate karma that would leave him deprived of the Dharma. He will never give rise to a thought that would leave him deprived of the Dharma, and he will lead many other beings as well to take up the Perfection of Wisdom correctly. He will have shown genuine delight in all the perfections and given them genuine praise. Because his former intention was pure, and his former intention was free from affliction, the evil māras will not come near him to create obstacles. The evil māras will find no opportunity against him. He will understand every deed of Māra that has arisen and come about. He will not be carried away by the deeds of Māra, and he will not fall under the power of the deeds of Māra. Supreme Prowess, by this enumeration too, the evil māras will not come near the bodhisattva to harass him.

Furthermore, Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not practice in the sign of union with form, and does not practice in the sign of separation from form. He does not practice in the sign of union with feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in the sign of separation from them. He does not practice in the sign of union with the characteristic of form, and does not practice in the sign of separation from the characteristic of form. He does not practice in the sign of union with the characteristic of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in the sign of separation from it.

He does not practice in the sign of the purity of form, and does not practice in the signlessness of the purity of form. He does not practice in the sign of the purity of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in the signlessness of the purity of consciousness. He does not practice in the sign of the purity of the object of form, and does not practice in the signlessness of the purity of the object of form. He does not practice in the sign of the purity of the object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in the signlessness of the purity of the object of consciousness.

He does not practice in union with the purity of the arising of form, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the arising of form. He does not practice in union with the purity of the arising of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the arising of consciousness. He does not practice in union with the purity of the essential nature of the object of form, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the essential nature of the object of form. He does not practice in union with the purity of the essential nature of the object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the essential nature of the object of consciousness.

He does not practice in the purity of the intrinsic nature of form. He does not practice in the purity of the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in union with the purity of the intrinsic nature of the object of form, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the intrinsic nature of the object of form. He does not practice in union with the purity of the intrinsic nature of the object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the intrinsic nature of the object of consciousness.

He does not practice in the purity of past, future, and present form. He does not practice in the purity of past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in the purity of the past, future, and present object of form. He does not practice in the purity of the past, future, and present object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness.

He does not practice in union with the purity of past, future, and present form, and does not practice in separation from the purity of past, future, and present form. He does not practice in union with the purity of past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and does not practice in separation from the purity of past, future, and present consciousness. He does not practice in union with the purity of the past, future, and present object of form, and does not practice in separation from the purity of the past, future, and present object of form. He does not practice in union with the purity of the past, future, and present object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, and he does not practice in separation from the purity of the past, future, and present object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness.

One who practices in this way neither joins with form nor separates from it. One neither joins with feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness nor separates from them. One neither joins with name and form nor separates from them. One neither joins with the inversions and the wrong views nor separates from them. One neither joins with the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm nor separates from them. One neither joins with attachment, aversion, and delusion nor separates from them. One neither joins with the notions of a self, a sentient being, a living being, a person, an entity, and a nonentity nor separates from them. One neither joins with annihilation and permanence nor separates from them. One neither joins with the elements and the sense sources nor separates from them. One neither joins with the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness nor separates from them. One neither joins with dependent origination nor separates from it. One neither joins with the qualities of sense pleasure nor separates from them. One neither joins with affliction and purification nor separates from them. One neither joins with giving and miserliness nor separates from them. One neither joins with moral discipline and faulty discipline nor separates from them. One neither joins with patience and malice nor separates from them. One neither joins with diligence and laziness nor separates from them. One neither joins with meditative concentration and distraction nor separates from them. One neither joins with wisdom and faulty wisdom nor separates from them. One neither joins with the non-inverted, the right abandonments, the immeasurables, the applications of mindfulness, and the bases of miraculous power nor separates from them. One neither joins with the faculties, the powers, the factors of awakening, the meditative absorptions, and the attainments nor separates from them. One neither joins with suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path nor separates from them. One neither joins with calm abiding and insight nor separates from them. One neither joins with knowledge and liberation nor separates from them. One neither joins with the knowledge and vision of liberation nor separates from it. One neither joins with the superknowledges nor separates from them. One neither joins with the levels of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas nor separates from them. One neither joins with the knowledge of nonarising, of exhaustion, and of nonformation nor separates from them. One neither joins with saṃsāra and nirvāṇa nor separates from them. One neither joins with the wisdom, the powers, and the fearlessnesses of a buddha nor separates from them. One neither joins with the perfection of the major marks nor separates from it. One neither joins with the perfect array of a buddhafield nor separates from it. One neither joins with the perfection of śrāvakas and bodhisattvas nor separates from it.

Why is that? Because, Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are neither joined nor separated. Why is that? Because, Supreme Prowess, no phenomena are present for joining and separation. Supreme Prowess, the word "joining" is permanence, and the word "separation" is annihilation. Supreme Prowess, no one at all realizes any phenomenon as having become joined or separated. Supreme Prowess, no phenomenon whatsoever is present for the sake of joining or separation.

Supreme Prowess, if there were any joining or separation of phenomena, then a maker of phenomena, an instigator, an arouser, an initiator, an experiencer, one who causes experience, a knower, one who causes knowing, a joining, and a separation would be found, and the Tathāgata too would have declared, "This is the maker of phenomena, the instigator, the arouser, the initiator, the experiencer, the one who causes experience, the knower, the one who causes knowing, the one who joins, and the one who separates." But, Supreme Prowess, because no joining or separation of any phenomenon is present at all, no maker of phenomena, instigator, arouser, initiator, experiencer, one who causes experience, knower, one who causes knowing, one who joins, or one who separates is apprehended; and since none is apprehended, the Tathāgata has not declared any.

Supreme Prowess, all phenomena arise from the inversions, and in those inversions too there is no joining or separation at all. Why is that? Because, Supreme Prowess, no real entity of the inversions can be apprehended, since its arising too is not apprehended. Why is that? Because, Supreme Prowess, the inversions are nonexistent, unreal, false, hollow, and deceptive by nature; since no phenomenon at all is apprehended in them, they are called inversions. Supreme Prowess, what is called inversion deceives beings. It beguiles beings. It is the false imagining of beings. It is the conceit, the agitation, and the proliferation of beings.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this: when a child is lured with an empty fist, he takes it to be something real. In the same way, Supreme Prowess, childish ordinary beings too, lured by what is hollow and by the inversions, are bewildered and think, "This is real." Perceiving the unreal as real, they are inverted, and for that reason it becomes difficult to free them from those inversions.

Thus, Suvikrāntavikrama, all foolish ordinary beings, bound by the bonds of error, wander everywhere. Although there is neither union nor separation, they think of it as union, they apprehend it as union, they see it as established as union, and they cling to it as separation.

Suvikrāntavikrama, wherever there comes to be union, there will come to be separation. Not to apprehend union and separation, not to form conceits about them, and not to cling to them is complete liberation. If one thinks of separation, apprehends it and clings to it, that becomes union itself, and not separation.

Therefore, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who sees this reason neither unites with any dharma nor separates from any. He does not take up a position for the sake of uniting with any dharma or for the sake of separating from it. Suvikrāntavikrama, this is how the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom fully understands union and separation. In this way, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva will quickly come to comprehend the far shore of all dharmas.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not practice in non-attachment to form. He does not practice in non-attachment to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in the purity of non-attachment to form. He does not practice in the purity of non-attachment to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in the object of non-attachment to form. He does not practice in the object of non-attachment to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness.

He does not practice in union with non-attachment to form. He does not practice in separation from non-attachment to form. He does not practice in union with non-attachment to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in separation from non-attachment to consciousness.

He does not practice in union with the purity of non-attachment to form. He does not practice in separation from the purity of non-attachment to form. He does not practice in union with the purity of non-attachment to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in separation from the purity of non-attachment to consciousness.

He does not practice in union with the purity of the object of form. He does not practice in separation from the purity of the object of form. He does not practice in the purity of the object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in separation from the purity of the object of consciousness.

Why is that? Because, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva, having fully understood all movement, conceit, wavering, practice, and full practice, does not practice in anything and does not fully practice in anything.

Furthermore, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not practice attached to past, future, and present form. He does not practice unattached to past, future, and present form. He does not practice attached to past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice unattached to past, future, and present consciousness.

He does not practice in the purity of past, future, and present form. He does not practice in the impurity of past, future, and present form. He does not practice in the purity of past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in the impurity of past, future, and present consciousness.

He does not practice in the purity of the object of non-attachment to past, future, and present form. He does not practice in the impurity of the object of non-attachment to past, future, and present form. He does not practice in the purity of the object of non-attachment to past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not practice in the impurity of the object of non-attachment to past, future, and present consciousness.

Why is that? Because, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not see any practice at all. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom enters into all practices, and that is non-practice. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly bring the qualities of omniscience to perfection.

Moreover, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not practice thinking, "Form is unobscured," and does not practice thinking, "Form is not unobscured." He does not practice thinking, "Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are unobscured," and does not practice thinking, "Consciousness is not unobscured." He does not practice thinking, "Form is peaceful," and does not practice thinking, "Form is not peaceful." He does not practice thinking, "Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are peaceful," and does not practice thinking, "Consciousness is not peaceful." He does not practice thinking, "Form is by its intrinsic nature unobscured," and does not practice thinking, "Form is not by its intrinsic nature unobscured." He does not practice thinking, "Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are by their intrinsic nature unobscured," and does not practice thinking, "Consciousness is not by its intrinsic nature unobscured." He does not practice thinking, "Form is by its intrinsic nature peaceful," and does not practice thinking, "Form is not by its intrinsic nature peaceful." He does not practice thinking, "Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are by their intrinsic nature peaceful," and does not practice thinking, "Consciousness is not by its intrinsic nature peaceful." He does not practice thinking that past, future, and present form is by its intrinsic nature isolated, or by its intrinsic nature peaceful. He does not practice thinking that past, future, and present form is not by its intrinsic nature isolated, or not by its intrinsic nature peaceful. He does not practice thinking that past, future, and present feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are by their intrinsic nature isolated, or by their intrinsic nature peaceful. He does not practice thinking that past, future, or present consciousness is not by its intrinsic nature isolated, or not by its intrinsic nature peaceful. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly bring the qualities of omniscience to perfection.

Moreover, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom does not form conceited notions about form. Likewise, he does not form conceited notions about feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not form conceited notions about the purity of form. He does not form conceited notions about the purity of the object of form. Likewise, he does not form conceited notions about the purity of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He does not form conceited notions about the purity of the object of consciousness.

Moreover, Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom is not attached to form. Likewise, he is not attached to feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He is not attached to the purity of form. He is not attached to the purity of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. He is not attached to the purity of the object of form. He is not attached to the purity of the object of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly bring the qualities of omniscience to perfection.

Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way comes near to the ten powers of a Tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses of a Tathāgata, the eighteen unshared qualities of a buddha, great loving-kindness, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.

Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way comes near to the thirty-two major marks of a great being. He comes near to a complexion the color of gold. He comes near to the infinite light of a Tathāgata. He comes near to the elephant's gaze. He comes near to the crown of the head whose summit cannot be seen. He comes near to the unobstructed wisdom and vision regarding the past, the future, and the present. He comes near to the instruction, the teaching, and the miraculous displays of a Tathāgata. He comes near to the declaration made through unobstructed wisdom and vision regarding the past, the future, and the present.

Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly attain all the completely pure qualities of a buddha. Suvikrāntavikrama, the bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly attain a completely pure buddha field. He will quickly gather an excellent array of śrāvakas and bodhisattvas.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way does not abide in form. He does not abide in feeling, perception, formations, or consciousness. He does not abide in name and form. He does not abide in the inverted views, in the obscurations, or in speculative views. He does not abide in the desire realm, the form realm, or the formless realm. He does not abide in the element of self or the element of sentient beings. He does not abide in the notion of a person or a life principle. He does not abide in the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness. He does not abide in the elements or the sense sources. He does not abide in affliction or in purification. He does not abide in dependent origination.

He does not abide in generosity or in miserliness. He does not abide in moral discipline or in corrupt discipline. He does not abide in patience or in malice. He does not abide in diligence or in laziness. He does not abide in meditative concentration or in distraction. He does not abide in wisdom or in corrupt wisdom. He does not abide in the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the immeasurables, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, or the limbs of awakening. He does not abide in the concentrations, the liberations, the meditative absorptions, or the attainments. He does not abide in suffering, its origin, its cessation, or the path. He does not abide in the knowledge of exhaustion, of nonformation, or of nonarising. He does not abide in calm abiding or insight. He does not abide in the higher knowledges. He does not abide in knowledge or liberation. He does not abide in the grounds of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, or pratyekabuddhas. He does not abide in the qualities of ordinary beings, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, or buddhas. He does not abide in nirvāṇa. He does not abide in the wisdom, the powers, or the fearlessnesses of a buddha. He does not abide in unobstructed wisdom. He does not abide in the seeing of the wisdom of past, future, and present. He does not abide in the perfection of a buddha field. He does not abide in a perfect array of śrāvakas. He does not abide in a perfect array of bodhisattvas.

Why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because all phenomena do not abide. Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are without an abode. Why is that? Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are without a base, and because they are without a base, they do not abide.

Supreme Prowess, if all phenomena had an abode, then phenomena would have a base, or they would remain permanently. The Tathāgata too would then point out the abode of all phenomena, saying, "This is the support of phenomena, this is the base of phenomena, this is the accumulation of phenomena." But, Supreme Prowess, since all phenomena do not abide, are without a base, and are without accumulation, no phenomenon whatsoever remains permanently. Therefore the Tathāgata has not taught an abode, a base, or an accumulation of phenomena.

Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are not established; they are without intrinsic nature. Since no phenomenon exists at all and none is established, phenomena do not abide anywhere whatsoever. Therefore all phenomena are called nonabiding. Supreme Prowess, by way of having no abode and having no support, all phenomena do not abide. Supreme Prowess, all phenomena have no abiding.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. For example, the four great rivers flow down from Lake Anavatapta, and until they reach the great ocean their stream is never cut off. In the same way, Supreme Prowess, all phenomena too have no abiding so long as formation has not been exhausted. Supreme Prowess, in what is called nonformation there is no abiding, there is no nonabiding, and there is no unbroken continuity either; none of these reckonings exist there. Supreme Prowess, what is called "abiding," what is called "interruption," what is called "nonabiding," and what is called "formation" are taught as reckonings. Supreme Prowess, what is called "abode," "support," or "base" was taught to show how sentient beings engage. In nonformation none of these reckonings exist at all, and therefore all phenomena are called nonabiding.

Supreme Prowess, this is the application of not abiding in any phenomenon on the part of a bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom. Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way will quickly perfect the qualities of omniscience. He will draw near to unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. He will quickly go to the seat of awakening. He will quickly attain the wisdom of omniscience. He will quickly perfect the wisdom of past, future, and present. He will quickly reach the far shore of the thoughts and the stirrings of mind of all sentient beings.

Supreme Prowess, therefore a bodhisattva, a great being, who wishes to act for the benefit of all sentient beings, who wishes to give gifts to all sentient beings, who wishes to satisfy all sentient beings with the gift of the Dharma, who wishes to break open the eggshell of ignorance of all sentient beings, who wishes to accomplish for all sentient beings the great wisdom, the wisdom of a buddha, who wishes to show compassion toward all sentient beings, who wishes to seek the welfare of all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of the Dharma for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of wealth for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of moral discipline for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of patience and gentleness for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of diligence for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of meditative concentration for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of wisdom for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of liberation for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of rebirth in the heavens for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of knowledge and liberation for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of the seeing of the wisdom of knowledge and liberation for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of nirvāṇa for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of the qualities of a buddha for all sentient beings, who wishes to bring about a good harvest of every excellent quality for all sentient beings, who wishes to turn the wheel of Dharma that no ascetic, brahmin, god, Māra, or anyone else has ever before turned in accordance with the Dharma, who wishes to give talks on the Dharma, who wishes to make predictions concerning the stage of a buddha, who wishes to make predictions concerning the stage of a śrāvaka, who wishes to make predictions concerning the stage of a pratyekabuddha, and who wishes to awaken the former aspirations and roots of virtue of sentient beings, should train in this perfection of wisdom, should strive in it, and should exert himself in it. He should strive in the practice of cultivating the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, I do not see any other quality of a bodhisattva that brings all the qualities of a buddha to completion as quickly as diligence and earnest application in this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom, that is to say, not abandoning the state of abiding in the perfection of wisdom.

Supreme Prowess, whenever any bodhisattva practices this perfection of wisdom, it should be known that this bodhisattva is near to unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening and is bound to reach it.

Supreme Prowess, I declare that those who hear this perfection of wisdom with their own ears, and having heard it, have faith in it, rejoice in it, and give rise to a true perception of it, will also, through that root of virtue, attain unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening; and it should also be known that they are bound to reach it. Those sons or daughters of good family, having gathered a great accumulation, will gather still other roots of virtue as well.

Supreme Prowess, when this chapter that teaches skill in the means of the perfection of wisdom has come into the hands of bodhisattvas, then even though some of them have not been directly given a prediction by the buddhas, the blessed ones, they are close to prediction; it should be known that before long they will directly receive their prediction.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this: sentient beings who have taken up and abide in the ten virtuous paths of action are near to rebirth in Uttarakuru, and it should be known that they are bound to reach it. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that a bodhisattva into whose hands this perfection of wisdom comes is near to unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this: sentient beings who give gifts and give freely, who gather other beings through giving, pleasant speech, beneficial conduct, and consistency of aim, who guard moral discipline and have crushed their pride, will quickly attain a high family and great wealth, and it should be known that they are bound to reach it.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this: it should be known that sentient beings who are generous by nature, who are perfect in moral discipline, who are perfect in patience, who cultivate loving-kindness toward beings, who also lead beings to uphold moral discipline, and who have accumulated the karma for becoming sovereigns, will quickly become wheel-turning kings. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that a bodhisattva into whose hands this perfection of wisdom comes will also quickly go to the seat of awakening.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this: if a king of the kṣatriya caste, on the fifteenth day, the day of the full moon, is seated attending to his affairs and the precious wheel appears before him, it should be known that he will become a wheel-turning king, and that all of his seven precious possessions will quickly appear as well. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that a bodhisattva into whose hands this chapter of the perfection of wisdom comes will quickly come to possess omniscience as the object of his aim.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. Suppose there are beings who have come to possess the supreme roots of virtue, whose conduct is good, who are devoted to the vast, who regard the human body as something disagreeable, who are perfect in moral discipline, and who do the work of many people. If they wish to be reborn as gods, it should be known that they will quickly be reborn with a fortune equal to that of the gods of the realm of the Four Great Kings, and that there too they will become lords.

Supreme Prowess, there are those who have completely pure roots of virtue and possess the supreme roots of virtue. They first give gifts and only afterward enjoy things themselves. They first do the work of other beings and only afterward do their own. They have no desire or attachment for what is not the Dharma, they are without fierce desire and attachment, and they aspire to be lord of the gods and sovereign. It should be known that before long, unwavering and unshakable, they will become lord and sovereign of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, and will even become Śakra (Indra), lord of the gods. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that the bodhisattva to whom this Perfection of Wisdom has come near will quickly attain the lordship that has power over all phenomena, and will arrive at it.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. Those beings who attain the four abodes of Brahmā, it should be known, will quickly be reborn in the Brahma world. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that the bodhisattva to whom this Perfection of Wisdom has come near will quickly turn the wheel of Dharma.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. When the months of summer draw near, this great earth grows moist because of the clouds. As the rain gradually falls, it becomes soaked and water wells up, and wherever many springs arise, they saturate the surface of this great earth. In the same way, the interior of the great earth too becomes soaked. Its surface, covered with water, saturates the valleys and the plains. When this great earth has thus been soaked by the clouds, the grasses, the branching trees, the medicinal herbs and the forests are all refreshed. Refreshed, they put forth many branches, leaves and much foliage, and many flowers and fruits form on them. At that time this great earth gives forth a pleasing fragrance, and at that time this great earth is adorned with flowers and fruits, with springs, ponds and pools. Then humans and nonhumans eat those flowers and fruits and delight in smelling those fragrances.

Supreme Prowess, in the same way, when this Perfection of Wisdom becomes manifest to a bodhisattva and he applies himself to this Perfection of Wisdom, then, Supreme Prowess, this bodhisattva, before long moistened by the wisdom of omniscience, will discern the wisdom of omniscience and will teach the wisdom of omniscience. It should be known that by teaching the unsurpassed jewel of the Dharma he moistens sentient beings.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. Those beings who are born in the abode of the nāga king Anavatapta send down the four great rivers and fill the great ocean. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, all the bodhisattvas into whose hands this Perfection of Wisdom has come, and who train in it, send down a great stream of Dharma, and with that gift of Dharma they satisfy all sentient beings.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. All beings who go near Mount Meru, king of mountains, become of a single color, namely the color of gold. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, all the bodhisattvas into whose hands this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom has come become of a single destiny, namely the destiny of the Tathāgata, the destiny of omniscience.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. The great ocean holds all waters, and into it all waters constantly flow. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, it should be known that the bodhisattva into whose hands this teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom comes will quickly become an ocean of all phenomena, a vessel of all phenomena, the place where all phenomena gather together; that he will quickly become unconfused by the conventional expressions of the Dharma, and will arrive at that.

Supreme Prowess, it is like this. When the disc of the sun rises, it makes all other lights dim. Supreme Prowess, in the same way, the bodhisattva in whom this Perfection of Wisdom has dawned will stand ready to illuminate all sentient beings with the Dharma. Supreme Prowess, because this has dawned in the bodhisattva, he will stand ready to illuminate the roots of virtue of all sentient beings. He will become worthy of the offerings of all sentient beings. He will become a pure field of merit for all sentient beings. He will become one to whom all sentient beings should go. He will be honored by all sentient beings, and he will be highly praised.

Supreme Prowess, the bodhisattva who trains in this Perfection of Wisdom trains in what is supreme for bodhisattvas. He trains in order to purify the path to nirvāṇa for all sentient beings. Why is that? Supreme Prowess, the training of the Perfection of Wisdom is the supreme, the excellent, the most eminent, the unsurpassed training. Supreme Prowess, the bodhisattva who trains in this will find the supreme excellence of all trainings. Through having embraced all trainings he will come forth; he will also teach all trainings, and he will also bring about the attainment of all trainings.

Supreme Prowess, the buddhas, the blessed ones of the past, the future, and the present, practicing the conduct of bodhisattvas, trained in this training, train in it, and will train in it. Having abided fully in this training, the buddhas, the blessed ones, taught the unsurpassed, completely pure training to all sentient beings, rightly teach it, and will rightly teach it. And why is that? Supreme Prowess, it is because this training of the Perfection of Wisdom is a training that surpasses all worlds. The training of the Perfection of Wisdom is the highest in all worlds; it is the self-arisen training in all worlds.

Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who trains in the Perfection of Wisdom does not train in any phenomenon whatsoever, whether mundane or supramundane, conditioned or unconditioned, accompanied by defilements or free of defilements, blameworthy or blameless. He gives rise to attachment toward nothing at all, and he abides without attachment to any phenomenon. And why is that? Supreme Prowess, all phenomena are without attachment, without bondage, and without liberation, because no phenomenon whatsoever comes together or abides in bondage.

Supreme Prowess, form is unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Name and form are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The inverted views, the obscurations, and wrong views are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Attachment, aversion, and delusion are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The six inner sense sources are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The six outer sense sources are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The element of self and the element of sentient beings are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Dependent origination is also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Affliction and purification are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Likewise, generosity and stinginess, moral discipline and corrupt discipline, patience and malice, diligence and laziness, meditative concentration and distraction, wisdom and corrupt wisdom are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The applications of mindfulness, the right abandonments, the bases of miraculous power, the immeasurables, and the absence of inversion are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, the meditative absorptions, and the meditative attainments are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The knowledge of non-arising, of exhaustion, and of non-formation is also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Knowledge and liberation are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The superknowledges are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The knowledge and vision of liberation is also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The qualities of ordinary beings, of śrāvakas, and of pratyekabuddhas are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Nirvāṇa is also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. The wisdom, powers, and fearlessnesses of a buddha are also unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Unobstructed knowledge and vision regarding the past, the future, and the present is also unattached, unbound, and unliberated.

And why is that? Supreme Prowess, since no bondage is apprehended in any phenomenon, all phenomena are without attachment and without bondage. Therefore their liberation is not apprehended. Supreme Prowess, as for what is called "without attachment," although there is no liberating them at all, nonetheless whoever sees phenomena in this way, that is called the knowledge and vision of non-attachment. Supreme Prowess, as for what is called "unattached," because attachment is not apprehended, and attachment to what is without attachment is not real, it is called non-attachment; in it, nothing at all is apprehended that would become attached or become bound. Because whatever would become attached and whatever would become bound is not apprehended, it is called unattached. Supreme Prowess, as for what is called "without realization," because realization is not apprehended and realization does not exist, it is called without realization; in it there is nothing at all to be realized. In it nothing at all that realizes is apprehended; because whatever realizes is not apprehended, it is called without realization. Where there is no attachment and no realization, how could there be liberation? That which does not become attached and does not become bound is freed, separated, cooled, and utterly liberated. Since in it there is nothing at all to be realized again, it is called liberated, and in it there is no release either.

Supreme Prowess, this is how a bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom enters into the knowledge and vision that all phenomena are unattached, unbound, and unliberated. Supreme Prowess, a bodhisattva who practices in this way draws near to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and will quickly attain the wisdom of omniscience. Supreme Prowess, in order to cut through the doubts of all bodhisattvas who strive in the Perfection of Wisdom and practice the Perfection of Wisdom, I have set down this seal. Supreme Prowess, because in the later time, in the last five hundred years of the later age, my śrāvakas will be unable to uphold this Perfection of Wisdom, I have taught this seal and blessed it.

Then the Blessed One addressed the five hundred bodhisattvas headed by Bhadrapāla and Susārthavāha, together with the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess: "Sons of noble family, after the Tathāgata has passed into complete nirvāṇa, in the future, in later times, when the true Dharma is declining and utterly disintegrating, at the time when it is coming to an end, will you be able to uphold this treasury of the jewel of Dharma that the Tathāgata accomplished over many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons? Will you be able to uphold this ground of the perfection of wisdom, which has the perfection of wisdom as its forerunner and from which the perfection of wisdom arises, and to teach it extensively and correctly to others as well?"

When he had said this, those bodhisattvas said to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, we are able to uphold this unsurpassed treasury of the jewel of Dharma that the Tathāgata accomplished over many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons, this ground of the perfection of wisdom, which has the perfection of wisdom as its forerunner and from which the perfection of wisdom arises, and to teach it extensively, correctly and thoroughly to others as well.

"Blessed One, that time will be one of great fear, great sorrow and great savagery. Most beings who appear then will have karma that leaves them destitute of the Dharma. They will be wrongly attached and greedy, attached through wrong desire, attached with desire to what is not the Dharma. Their minds will be gripped by jealousy and craving. They will be wrathful and fierce, harsh and difficult to speak to, crooked, untamed and deceitful. They will practice what is not the Dharma, and will be much given to quarrels, disputes, fault-finding and arrogance. They will not abide by restraint, and will be overpowered by craving and greed. They will be lazy, with little diligence, lacking mindfulness and without vigilance. They will speak idle and frivolous chatter and be loud-mouthed, hiding and concealing their evil deeds within. They will have great attachment, aversion and delusion, and be overwhelmed by the eggshell of ignorance and the black darkness of delusion. They will act in keeping with the side of Māra. They will rise up to oppose this profound Dharma and Vinaya, this treasury of the jewel of Dharma, and they will be of a disagreeable character. Even so, Blessed One, we are eager to uphold and recite this unsurpassed treasury of the jewel of Dharma, for which the Tathāgata accomplished roots of virtue over many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons.

"In that final time, those who seek this Dharma and wish to train in this Dharma, who are without guile and upright, without deceit, who would not give it up even for the sake of their lives, who do not oppose a Dharma such as this, who will not reject this Dharma discourse, and who will not turn their backs on this Dharma discourse, will be very few. Acting for their benefit and giving them encouragement, we shall truly extol a Dharma such as this and shall make them truly and thoroughly rejoice."

Then the Blessed One, at that time, consecrated this teaching of the perfection of wisdom, the abode of the Dharma, and he blessed this Dharma discourse in order to cut the snares of the evil Māras.

Then the Blessed One smiled, and this great trichiliocosm, this world system of a billion worlds, was pervaded by a great light. The gods saw humans, and humans too saw the gods. All the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas who had gathered there scattered divine flowers over the Blessed One, offered divine garments as well, and let out a great cry: "How wonderful! This blessing that the Tathāgata has bestowed, which is not within the domain of the evil Māras, is a great blessing! Through this blessing of the Dharma all the snares of Māra have been destroyed. Those sons or daughters of noble family need not fear, thinking, 'We are in danger from Māra the Evil One.' Those bodhisattvas who uphold, recite, and teach this Dharma discourse extensively, correctly and thoroughly to others as well will pass beyond Māra and his hosts. Those who uphold, recite, and teach this Dharma discourse extensively and correctly to others as well will be victorious over Māra the Evil One and his hosts."

Then the Blessed One said to the bodhisattva Supreme Prowess: "So it is. Supreme Prowess, so it is; it is just as those gods have said. Supreme Prowess, the Tathāgata has set a boundary against the evil Māras for this Dharma discourse. Supreme Prowess, those sons or daughters of noble family who uphold, retain, recite, and teach this Dharma discourse extensively, correctly and thoroughly to others as well will not become the domain of the evil Māras. Those sons and daughters of noble family will be invincible to the evil Māras. Those who uphold, retain, recite, and teach this Dharma discourse extensively, correctly and thoroughly to others as well will vanquish Māra and their adversaries and will be victorious in battle.

"Supreme Prowess, this Dharma discourse will not come into the hands of beings who are thoroughly afflicted and bound by the snares of Māra. Supreme Prowess, this is for the thoroughbreds, not for those who are not thoroughbreds. Supreme Prowess, it is like this: thoroughbred elephants and thoroughbred horses are not used by provincial kings, nor are they even seen by coarse people."

Supreme Prowess, such thoroughbred elephants and thoroughbred horses come within sight of a wheel-turning king. Because they have appeared for his enjoyment, for his service and honor, and for his use, they come to be used by wheel-turning kings. In the same way, Supreme Prowess, this Dharma discourse comes into the hands of thoroughbred beings among humans, for their enjoyment.

Supreme Prowess, take, for example, the nāga king called Close Essence, the nāga king Supratiṣṭhita, and the nāga king Airāvaṇa. They do not come for the enjoyment of human beings, and they do not come within sight of human beings. Nor do they come to be used or enjoyed by others. Those nāga kings come for the enjoyment of thoroughbred gods. In whatever array Śakra (Indra), lord of the gods, sets forth, in just that way those nāga kings also arrange themselves in a like array and come for his enjoyment.

In the same way, Supreme Prowess, this Dharma discourse comes to be used and enjoyed by lords among humans, by thoroughbred people, through reading it, explaining it, and teaching it widely. This Dharma discourse will become for them a great array and a great expansion, and it will bring them the light of the Dharma. In this Dharma discourse they will experience the seven joys of the Dharma. If even those who retain just a single principle from this Dharma discourse come to possess supreme joy, what need is there to mention those who write it out in full, take it up, keep it, honor it, and spread it widely? This Dharma discourse will take hold of those lords among humans and those thoroughbred people. It is not the domain of those who are not thoroughbred. Supreme Prowess, I have spoken of these things in order to cut through all doubts.

When this Dharma discourse was being taught, many immeasurable bodhisattvas attained acceptance of the unborn nature of phenomena. Countless, immeasurable sentient beings generated the mind set on unsurpassed, perfect and complete awakening, and the Tathāgata revealed that they are certain to attain awakening.

When the Blessed One (the Buddha) had spoken thus, the bodhisattva, the great being Supreme Prowess, the fourfold assembly, and the world with its gods, humans, asuras, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.

This is called the chapter on benefits, the seventh.

The noble Perfection of Wisdom Teaching Requested by Suvikrāntavikrama is complete.

It was translated and edited by the Indian preceptors Śīlendrabodhi and Jinamitra and the chief editor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé, and it was further revised and finalized according to the new terminology.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The Sanskrit title is reconstructed from the Tibetan transliteration as given. The name Supreme Prowess renders the Tibetan literally; the title suggests Suvikrāntavikrama, so the name is likely that of the interlocutor, and the translated form is a standard English rendering of it. "Twelve hundred and fifty" renders the Tibetan "two thousand five hundred" wording, which reads as twelve hundred fifty (stong nyis brgya lnga bcu); this follows the usual count of the monastic assembly.  The line on those who "do not keep the requisites modest" renders a difficult phrase (yo byad bsnyungs pa dang mi ldan pa), taken as lacking austerity in the requisites. The phrase "the wisdom that is both unequaled and equal" follows the Tibetan literally (mi mnyam pa dang mnyam pa'i ye shes).  The name Subduer by Supreme Prowess is rendered literally from rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, as the Sanskrit name was not identified. The passage turns on the statement that primordial wisdom is called such by ignorance only conventionally. The phrase beginning "if primordial wisdom could be known through ignorance" is rendered as the text has it. The sentence about "the unsurpassed one" has no explicit referent in the Tibetan.  The interlocutor's name, rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, is the Tibetan rendering of Suvikrāntavikrāmin, the bodhisattva of the title (Ārya-suvikrāntavikrāmi-paripṛcchā). I kept it as a literal vocative, since the Tibetan itself is the only form in hand and the Sanskrit equivalent is only inferred from the title. "Dwells always in the six" (drug la rtag tu gnas) is obscure; it probably refers to the six sense bases or the six constant states of mindfulness. The passage "ngas ... bshad do" is the Buddha's own speech, recalling an earlier verse.  The name Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa corresponds to the title Sūvikrāntavikrama ("Excellent Valor") in the opening Sanskrit title. I kept a literal rendering here, "the one overwhelmed by the force of excellence." This is a literal reading of the Tibetan, which differs from the usual sense of the Sanskrit name (one of excellent valor who overcomes). The identification of the name and the choice of rendering are doubtful, and the text's wording around "overwhelmed" is odd at several points. The phrase "freedom from" in the middle section follows the Tibetan, which appears abbreviated there.  Rab kyi Tsal gyis Nampar Nönpa is the name of the interlocutor, whose Sanskrit name I could not reconstruct with certainty (the title suggests Supraviktāntavikrama, "Surpassing through Supreme Prowess"); I left it as Tibetan phonetics. The sentence on "synonym for the qualities of a buddha as something real" is condensed from a difficult negation. The remark that the realm of sentient beings is without realm also plays on the term for "realm."  The interlocutor's name, Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa, is the Tibetan rendering of an Indic name; I left the Tibetan transliteration since I cannot securely reconstruct the Sanskrit (the title suggests Suvikrāntavikrama, "Of Excellent Prowess"). The sentence "Such a one has transmitted the notion of sentient being" (དེས་སེམས་ཅན་དུ་འདུ་ཤེས་བསྩལ་བས) is syntactically difficult and the sense is uncertain. The phrase "rendered their own conduct unworkable" (རང་གི་སྤྱོད་པ་རྣམ་པར་མ་རུང་བར་བྱས་པ) is rendered literally. The first sentence of the passage opens mid-sentence from the previous piece; "སྐྱེས་པ" in "beings who have arisen as sentient beings" is rendered literally and may be a scribal variant.  The name Prabhāvyūha for རབ་ཀྱི་རྩལ་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་གནོན་པ is my reconstruction of the interlocutor's name, consistent with the Sanskrit title Suvikrāntavikrama; the Tibetan literally means "Overpowering through Supreme Prowess." If house style prefers a literal rendering or Suvikrāntavikrama, adjust throughout. Likewise, ཤ་ར་དྭ་ཏིའི་བུ is rendered Śāriputra. The chapter title at the opening of the second volume is not given in this piece; the colophon of the first chapter closes this piece.  The translation takes "Anavatapta" (མ་དྲོས་པ) here as the nāga king, per the glossary. In the closing simile the opening "Why is that?" and "sons" (བུར་གྱུར་པ) are read as the nāga's offspring and retinue. The eight qualities of the rain are not enumerated in the source here.  Śāriputra's "no courage" renders a Tibetan idiom (rngo mi thogs) for being unable to bring oneself to undertake something. The transition to "Śāriputra" is resumed in the next piece. The two parallel parts, the lion cubs and the sons of the wheel-turning king, are both Tathāgata-lineage images, and "begotten" is used for the Tibetan "bskyed pa."  The name Rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa is rendered as Pravikrāntavijaya, following the Sanskrit title (Suvikrāntavikrama), which suggests the bodhisattva is Suvikrāntavikrama; the reconstruction of the name is uncertain, and its literal sense "Subduer by Superior Power" is given alongside. The repeated "farther shore" (pha rol) and "nearer shore" (tshu rol) play on the pāramitā etymology. The odd "ṭi lag tu" in the colophon material is not part of this piece. The chapter heading "Ānanda" is a source colophon and has been kept as the chapter ending.  The bodhisattva's name རབ་ཀྱི་རྩལ་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་གནོན་པ (Skt. Suvikrāntavikrāmin, per the title) is rendered literally as "Overcomer through Supreme Power," following the Tibetan, since the sūtra's own Sanskrit title gives a different, more florid form. In the sentence about not being a domain, "form by means of form" renders the instrumental literally; the point is that no aggregate can grasp itself as an object. The rendering "union / non-union" follows the Tibetan sbyor ba / mi sbyor ba, though the explanatory gloss uses "gathered together" and "separated" ('du ba / bral ba).  The interlocutor's name is the Tibetan rendering of an Indian name (the sūtra is the Sūvikrāntavikrāmi-paripṛcchā); I have kept the Tibetan phonetic form "Rab kyi Rtsal gyis Rnam par Gnon pa" for narration since the Sanskrit original is not securely identifiable from this passage alone; its meaning is roughly "Overcomer through Supreme Prowess." The final sentence is cut at the piece boundary and is completed in the next piece.  The pair rendered "neither has an end nor is endless" translates mཐའ and mཐའ་མེད་པ (Skt. anta / ananta). Here it reflects the classic undecided question of whether things are finite or infinite, so "end" fits better than the glossary's "extreme." "Speculative view" renders ལྟ་བར་སོང་བ (dṛṣṭigata). "Faulty discipline" and "faulty wisdom" render འཆལ་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས and འཆལ་པའི་ཤེས་རབ, that is, immorality and corrupt understanding, the opposites of the perfections of discipline and wisdom.  In two places the Tibetan breaks the otherwise regular "neither X nor non-X" pattern: the bases of miraculous power are paired with "immeasurables," and the passage on conceit, wavering, and elaboration first says the aggregates "have no" elaboration and then that they are "not free of" elaboration. Both are translated as they stand.  In the paragraph on unconditioned phenomena the Tibetan reads "bstan pa 'di bzhin nyid" ("this suchness") where every parallel paragraph has "bstan pa'i de bzhin nyid" ("the suchness of the teaching"). This looks like a copyist's slip, and it has been translated according to the regular formula.  The terms rendered "accumulating" and "not accumulating" are uncertain; they may reflect a Sanskrit pair such as "taking up" and "putting down." The list repeats "birth" more than once, and the translation keeps these repetitions as the Tibetan has them.  The verb rendered "lit" for the lamp is written with a form that can mean "blown"; the context of radiating light requires the sense of a lamp burning, and it is translated so.  "Not established" renders yongs su ma grub pa (Skt. likely aniṣpanna or apariniṣpanna), the term on which the whole passage turns. In the list of terms for a self, "one born of Manu" and "son of Manu" render the standard Tibetan equivalents of manuja and mānava. "The seen, the heard, the distinguished, and the cognized" renders the classic set of four modes of experience, where "distinguished" stands for what is sensed or thought (mata). "Accumulation and further accumulation" probably reflect the Sanskrit pair ācaya and upacaya.  The exchange on "the proper way or improper way" (ཚུལ / ཚུལ་མ་ལགས་པ) answered by "honored or highly honored" (བཀུར་བ / རྣམ་པར་བཀུར་བ) is translated literally; the pairing is obscure and probably reflects a Sanskrit wordplay (perhaps naya / vinaya or similar) that the Tibetan does not make transparent. In the list of the elements, ས is "earth," not "ground."  The speaker of the requests (gsol pa) is not named in this piece; from the context and the replies addressed to him, it is Śāriputra, so he is named as the speaker. Here རྒྱ་མཚོ is the ordinary word "ocean," not the nāga king Sāgara.  The exchange on the abode or basis of phenomena appears twice in succession in the Tibetan, with only a minor wording difference; both are translated. "One born of Manu" and "child of Manu" render the standard terms for a self in the list of wrong notions (Skt. manuja and mānava). "Linking" renders the Tibetan term for connecting (Skt. pratisandhi, also used for rebirth-linking).  The text reads "by the śrāvakas" (ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱིས) where the parallel sentences that follow have "the ground of the pratyekabuddhas" and "the ground of the buddhas"; this is taken as a slip for ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས, "the ground of the śrāvakas," and translated accordingly.  Three related Tibetan terms are kept distinct: "infinite" for mthaʼ yas (ananta), "boundless" for mu med (aparyanta), and "endless" for mthaʼ med, which the text itself equates with "boundless." The statement that this Dharma is "not their domain and range," directly after saying it is the domain of such bodhisattvas, is rendered as it stands; it reflects the sūtra's point that those who have transcended all domains do not hold even this teaching as a domain.  The phrase rendered "who bring light and have become a ford for beings" reflects the Tibetan mu stegs, here in its root sense of a ford or crossing place (tīrtha), not "non-Buddhist". The construction is compressed and could also be read as "who have become a ford for beings and bring light".  "Who have realized it directly with their bodies" renders a term corresponding to the Abhidharma category of the body-witness (kāyasākṣin). The final clause, "unless they are held back by the power of their aspirations," reflects the idea that bodhisattvas may delay their awakening through the force of their vows.  In the passage on what is "not the fruit of hearing," the Tibetan puts a negative on the first two items, literally "do not become heedless" and "do not become complacent." The rest of the list (declining aspiration, diminishing diligence, ill will) and the later warning against complacency make it clear that heedlessness and complacency are among the faults meant. The translation follows that evident sense.  "Exposition" renders the Tibetan term corresponding to Sanskrit nirdeśa, the same word that appears in the text's title, and it is distinguished here from plain "teaching." The phrase rendered "the supramundane wisdom that leads to penetration" most likely corresponds to Sanskrit nirvedhagāminī prajñā.  The text reads "ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱིས་དང་" where the parallel items require "ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས་དང་" ("the ground of the śrāvakas"); translated according to the evident reading. The phrase "དབང་དེ་མཐོང་བས" is rendered "because I see this point," taking དབང as "the bearing, the reason."  "One who has cut off the stream of the path" renders lam gyi rgyun gcad, which the text itself identifies as a synonym for an arhat; it likely reflects an Indic epithet of the type chinnavartman, "one whose track (of rebirth) is cut." The sentence beginning "If there were anything in it that gave rise to something" is syntactically loose in the Tibetan and is rendered for its evident sense.  "Object" renders the Tibetan for ālambana, the objective support of a mental act; "course in" and "practice" both render the single verb for carati. The list of self-notions follows the standard Prajñāpāramitā series (jīva, poṣa, puruṣa, pudgala, manuja, mānava, and the various agents, experiencers, and knowers); "hollow" renders the term for something insubstantial and without core.  In the passage on the grounds, the Tibetan reads "bodhisattvas and śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas" (with the connective particle dang) where the parallel sentences have the plural marker dag after "bodhisattvas"; since the explanation that follows mentions only the grounds of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, dang has been read as a slip for dag, so that bodhisattvas are the ones practicing. The alternative reading would be "the grounds of bodhisattvas, śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas."  The final item of the first list, rendered "a seer," is literally "view"; in this list of agent terms for a supposed self (life principle, creature, person, agent, and so on) it most likely corresponds to Sanskrit paśyaka, "one who sees," though it could also be read as "views" in general. The verbs rendered "lifts up" and "sets down" translate the Tibetan terms for raising and placing, that is, neither accepting nor rejecting form.  The phrase "all of these are not conceptual examination, investigation, practice, or thorough practice" follows the Tibetan negation literally. The intended sense appears to be that none of these notions amounts to genuine examination or practice. "Conceit" renders the Tibetan term for presumptuous conceiving (Skt. likely manyanā).  The sentence "the inversion by which it is produced is not unobscured" is translated as the Tibetan reads (with the negative "not"). It sits awkwardly with the next sentence, which says that what produces the mind is also unobscured. A negative may have entered the text, but the reading has been kept. In the list of clingings, "of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas" is written with an instrumental particle followed directly by the quotation marker. This has been taken as a contraction of "the grounds of" the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, matching the earlier list. The Tibetan word for "giving rise to thought" (sems bskyed) here means the arising or production of mind, not the generation of bodhicitta.  The opening phrase "full understanding of arising" renders a term that could also be read as "full understanding of birth"; given the preceding context on the non-arising of mind and phenomena, "arising" is preferred.  In the second list (the "because" clause), "superknowledges" appears twice, once in place of where the knowledge of non-arising would be expected. It is translated as written. The verb rendered "cultivate" can also mean "meditate on."  The term rendered "wickedness" is uncertain; in this list, which otherwise mirrors the opposites of the six perfections, it probably stands for immorality or depravity. In "the level of the pratyekabuddhas," the text reads an instrumental particle where the parallel line has "level"; I have read it as a scribal slip for "level." The word rendered "faith" in the closing summary is as written, though it sits oddly among the negative terms that follow.  "Removing or not removing" renders འདུལ་བ, which in Prajñāpāramitā usage (Skt. vinaya) can mean the removal or dispelling of a factor as well as taming or disciplining it. The Tibetan's lists are translated as they stand, including the omission of "peaceful" in the future and present statements, the inclusion of "empty" among the wrong conceptions, and the list of truths beginning with origin rather than suffering.  The phrase rendered "unreliable apprehending" (Tibetan ya ma brla) is obscure; the expression usually means "uncertain, unstable, untrustworthy," and the exact sense here is not certain.  The sentence rendered "through the sameness of the path, he will cut off the stream of paths" is obscure as it stands; it presumably means that the stream of wrong or saṃsāric paths is cut, but the Tibetan does not specify this.  The phrase rendered "equal to the unequaled" reads the Tibetan as the standard epithet asamasama rather than as two separate qualities ("unequaled and equal").  The phrase rendered "craving for nonexistence" literally reads "craving for prosperity," a Tibetan rendering that takes Sanskrit vibhava in its sense of "wealth"; the doctrinal term vibhavatṛṣṇā, craving for nonexistence, is clearly intended beside "craving for existence." "Inverted views" appears twice in the list of things not abided in; the second occurrence, at the head of a list of path factors, is translated as it stands.  "Object" renders Tibetan dmigs pa (Skt. ālambana or upalambha), which may also be understood as "apprehension" or "objective support" of each aggregate. "Union" and "separation" render 'du ba and 'bral ba (conjunction and disjunction).  The text reads "an empty ཆད་པ," which makes no sense here; this has been read as ཆང་པ, "fist," giving the familiar image of a child fooled by an empty fist.  "This reason" renders don gyi dbang, Sanskrit arthavaśa, "compelling reason." Here dbang does not have its ritual sense of empowerment. In one sentence the Tibetan reads "the purity of non-practice" for feeling and the other aggregates, where every parallel sentence has "non-attachment." It has been translated as "non-attachment," taking it as a copyist's slip. Some sentences of the repeated pattern are abbreviated or irregular in the Tibetan, such as the one lacking "union," and those naming consciousness alone. They are translated as they stand.  "Instruction, teaching, and miraculous displays" likely corresponds to the three kinds of marvel of a buddha (instruction, revealing others' minds, and magical display). "Declaration" renders ལུང་བསྟན་པ, which here plausibly means the authoritative declaration or prediction made by the Tathāgata's unobstructed knowledge. "Isolated" renders དབེན་པ (vivikta), in the sense of void or empty of intrinsic existence.  "Reckonings" renders བགྲང་བ (Skt. likely saṃkhyā), meaning conventional designations or enumerations. The final phrase, literally "go to the far side of the mind-generations and movements of all beings," is taken to mean fully comprehending them.  "Good harvest" renders ལོ་ལེགས་པ, literally "a good year," that is, an abundant crop. The phrase rendered "attending to his affairs" (དོན་བྱེད་ཅིང་འདུག་པ) is terse in the Tibetan. In parallel accounts, the king is observing the fortnightly purification day when the wheel appears, but this text does not say so.  The phrase rendered "they have no desire or attachment for what is not the Dharma, they are without fierce desire and attachment" is a somewhat awkward string in the Tibetan, and its exact construction is uncertain. "One to whom all sentient beings should go" renders the Tibetan literally and is understood as a refuge or destination for beings.  "Without realization" renders the Tibetan as written; the term may reflect a Sanskrit word for comprehension or apprehension, and the argument parallels the preceding treatment of attachment and bondage.  The term rendered "thoroughbred" (Skt. ājāneya) refers both to noble-bred animals and, figuratively, to spiritually noble, well-trained persons. Of two nearly identical sentences, the first has "pass beyond" Māra and his hosts and the second "be victorious over" them; the Tibetan words differ by one letter, and both readings make sense, so each has been kept as written.  The nāga king ཉེར་རྩི could not be identified with confidence; its name is rendered by meaning as "Close Essence." ས་སྲུང་གི་བུ is taken as Airāvaṇa, the standard Tibetan rendering; together with Supratiṣṭhita these are the elephant-nāgas who serve Śakra, which fits the simile. The term ཅང་ཤེས, "thoroughbred," used of the elephants and horses, is kept for gods and humans as well, in the sense of noble and discerning, so that the simile stays parallel.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
