The Noble Crown of the Buddhas: A Great Mahāyāna Sūtra, a Great Dharma Teaching (Ārya Buddhamakuṭa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra Mahādharmaparyāya)

The Noble Crown of the Buddhas, known in Sanskrit as the Ārya Buddhamakuṭa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra and in Tibetan as Pakpa Sangyé Tsukgyen Zhéjawa Tekpa Chenpo'i Do, is a Mahāyāna sūtra belonging to the great class of Dharma teachings. The text opens in the classic sūtra style, with the Buddha residing on Vulture Peak Mountain at Rājagṛha in the company of a vast assembly of monks, bodhisattvas such as Maitreya and Mañjuśrī, and multitudes of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and other beings. It is catalogued as Toh 274 in the Kangyur, the collection of canonical texts attributed to the Buddha himself. The translation was carried out by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla together with the great Tibetan editor-translator, the monk Ye shes sde, who also revised and finalized the text.

This was translated by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, together with the great editor-translator, the monk Ye shes sde, who also revised and finalized it.

In the language of India: Ārya Buddhamakuṭa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra Mahādharmaparyāya.

In the language of Tibet: The Noble Crown of the Buddhas — a Great Vehicle sūtra, a great Dharma teaching.

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Thus did I hear. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagṛha, on Vulture Peak Mountain, together with a great Saṅgha of monks, all of them arhats whose defilements were exhausted, two thousand two hundred and fifty monks in all. He was also together with a great retinue of bodhisattvas, including Maitreya, Mañjuśrī, and others; and together with many assemblies of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, smell-eaters (gandharvas), sages, vidyādharas (holders of knowledge-mantras), and daughters of the gods.

Then the Blessed One spoke to the venerable Mahākāśyapa: "Mahākāśyapa, I will fully teach the cause by which the wholesome roots of beginning bodhisattvas are brought to complete ripening. Therefore listen, and hold it well in mind, for I shall explain it to you."

"Excellent, Blessed One," said the venerable Mahākāśyapa, and he listened to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One declared: "Mahākāśyapa, to the east of this buddha field, beyond world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā, there is a world-system called Adorned by Meditative Absorption. There dwells at this very time a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha (samyaksaṃbuddha) named Glorious Sacred Elephant of Meditative Absorption.

Mahākāśyapa, in that buddha field there is a great bodhisattva (mahāsattva) named Immaculate Conqueror. When that Tathāgata has passed beyond, he will fully and perfectly awaken to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi), and will arise in the world as a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha, also named Glorious Sacred Elephant of Meditative Absorption.

Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle and who hold in mind the names of that Blessed One — the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Glorious Sacred Elephant of Meditative Absorption — and of that great bodhisattva Immaculate Conqueror: when those beings are born in any future existence, they will remember their previous lives. They will turn back from cyclic existence for a hundred aeons. They will fully take hold of an immeasurable accumulation of merit. And they will draw near to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening.

Mahākāśyapa, to the east of this buddha field, beyond world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in two rivers Gaṅgā, there is a world-system called Beautifully Adorned with the Essence of Awakening. There dwells at this very time a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Glorious Sacred Lotus.

Mahākāśyapa, in that buddha field too there is a great bodhisattva named Lotus in Hand. When that Tathāgata has passed beyond, he too will fully and perfectly awaken to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening, and will arise in the world as a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha."

will arise in the world as a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha named King of the Parasol of the Sacred Lotus.

Great Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family hold in mind the name of the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Glorious Sacred Lotus, and the name of the great bodhisattva Lotus in Hand — when they are born in existence they will remember their past lives. Like the lotus, they will be unstained by all the non-virtuous phenomena of the world. Like a lotus rising from the water, they will be supremely exalted. They will be irreversible from unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening. They will be drawn back from thirty aeons of cyclic existence. And they will attain proximity to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening. They will also come to hold an immeasurable accumulation of merit.

Great Mahākāśyapa, to the east of this buddha field, beyond world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in three rivers Gaṅgā, there is a world-system called Heap of Purity Free from Dust. There dwells at this very time a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Glorious Sacred Light of the Solar Disc, living and teaching the Dharma.

Great Mahākāśyapa, in that buddha field too there is a great bodhisattva named Solar Radiance. When that Tathāgata has passed beyond, he too will fully and perfectly awaken to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening, and will arise in the world as a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Possessed of the Noble Body Complete with All Excellent Marks of Glory.

Great Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the vehicle of the bodhisattvas hold in mind the name of that Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Possessed of the Noble Body Complete with All Excellent Marks of Glory, and the name of the bodhisattva Solar Radiance — when they are born in existence they will remember their past lives. They will attain an illumination of all virtuous phenomena like that of the solar disc. Know that for them there will be no fear of falling into the three lower realms. They will attain proximity to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening. They will be drawn back from a thousand aeons of cyclic existence. And they will be irreversible from unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening.

Great Mahākāśyapa, to the east of this buddha field, beyond world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in four rivers Gaṅgā, there is a world-system called Sovereign. There dwells at this very time a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Sacred Single Jeweled Parasol.

Great Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle hold in mind the name of that Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Sacred Single Jeweled Parasol — when they are born in existence they will remember their past lives. They will not be born in lowly families. They will not be born in impoverished families. In every place where they are born, they will be born into royal families. Never will they be deprived of a father, deprived of a mother,

deprived of resources, or afflicted by illness. They will also attain a state proximate to unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. They will turn back from cyclic existence for thirty thousand aeons. And they will become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening.

Great Mahākāśyapa, to the east, beyond world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in five Ganges rivers, there exists a world-system called Utterly Pure Accumulation. There dwells at present, alive and remaining, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Glorious Subduer of the Supreme Meditative Absorption.

Great Mahākāśyapa, when that Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Glorious Subduer of the Supreme Meditative Absorption was in former times practicing the conduct of a bodhisattva, he planted this great aspiration, speaking thus: "Whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle hold my name in mind — when they are born in existence, in every birth wherever they are born, may they attain the going forth into renunciation. Having attained the going forth, may they obtain a thousand meditative absorptions. From a single meditative absorption may they fully accomplish ten billion hundred-thousand meditative absorptions. And may they not degenerate from those meditative absorptions. May they behold the ten thousand buddhas of the past who have passed into nirvāṇa while those buddhas teach the Dharma. Just as it was with those of the past, so may it be likewise for those of the present. May they become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. And in every birth wherever they are born, through thousands upon thousands of aeons may they turn back from cyclic existence. And may they also attain a state proximate to unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening."

Great Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle hold in mind the name of that Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Glorious Subduer of the Supreme Meditative Absorption — when they are born in existence they will remember their past lives. From a single meditative absorption they will come to obtain ten billion hundred-thousand meditative absorptions.

Great Mahākāśyapa, to the east of this buddha-field, beyond thirty thousand buddha-fields, there exists a world-system called Perfectly Luminous. There dwells at present, alive and remaining, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha named Glorious King Supremely Exalted through the Splendor of the Jeweled Maṇḍala.

Great Mahākāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the vehicle of the bodhisattvas hold in mind the name of that Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and fully awakened buddha Glorious King Supremely Exalted through the Splendor of the Jeweled Maṇḍala — when they are born in existence they will be endowed with the recollection of past lives, with intelligence, with wisdom, with splendor, and with words and irreversible eloquence of such a kind that they are never reluctant regarding their marks and excellent features. When they teach the Dharma, a form of the buddha will be present before them. They will be endowed with words and irreversible eloquence of such a kind that they will never be reluctant, in tens of billions of innumerable instances, even regarding what they have not heard and for which they have received no scriptural transmission.

They will teach the Dharma in such a way that beings will, without fail, become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. Those beings will turn away from cyclic existence for innumerable hundreds of thousands of tens of billions of eons. Those beings will also fully embrace an immeasurable accumulation of merit.

O great Kāśyapa, to the east of this buddha-field, beyond forty thousand world-systems, there is a world-system called Endowed with Jewels. In that world there presently dwells and lives the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha named Splendor of the All-Illuminating Jeweled Flower. O great Kāśyapa, those sons of noble family and daughters of noble family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle and who hold the name of that Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the Splendor of the All-Illuminating Jeweled Flower — when they are born in existence they will teach the Dharma. If they wish, they will make this Jambudvīpa hear their voice. If they wish, they will make this great trichiliocosm world-system hear their voice. When they teach the Dharma, they will teach it to those sentient beings in whatever way those beings are inclined, and in such a way that those beings will, without fail, become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. Those beings will turn their backs on cyclic existence for sixty thousand eons.

O great Kāśyapa, to the east of this buddha-field, beyond sixty thousand world-systems, there is a world-system called the Precious. In that world there presently dwells and lives the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha named Precious Essence. O great Kāśyapa, those sons of noble family and daughters of noble family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle and who hold the name of that Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Precious Essence — when they are born in existence they will recollect past lives. They will attain the seven precious things, the jewels of the limbs of awakening.

O great Kāśyapa, to the south of this buddha-field, beyond thirty thousand buddha-fields, there is a world-system called Pleasing Sound. In that world there presently dwells and lives the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha named Boundless Rank Utterly Victorious. O great Kāśyapa, those sons of noble family and daughters of noble family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle and who hold the name of that Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Boundless Rank Utterly Victorious — when they are born in existence they will recollect past lives. They will also attain the bodhisattva meditative absorption called Pure Lunar Maṇḍala. Abiding in it, they will behold, in the eastern direction, buddhas and blessed ones as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges. Likewise, in the south, west, north, southeast, southwest, northwest, northeast, below, above, and throughout all ten directions, in each and every direction they will behold buddhas and blessed ones as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges. They will come to know properly the Dharma those buddhas teach. They will continually delight the arising of buddhas. Until the very end of awakening, they will be inseparable from those blessed buddhas.

They will become irreversible with regard to the unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening. In thirty-five thousand aeons they will turn back from cyclic existence. They will fully acquire an immeasurable accumulation of merit.

Great Kāśyapa, in the southern direction, beyond thirty-five thousand buddha-fields from this buddha-field, there is a world-realm called Supreme Fragrance of Sweet Perfume. In that realm there dwells and abides at this very moment a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly complete buddha by the name of King of Limitless Supreme Fragrance. Great Kāśyapa, the Tathāgata King of Limitless Supreme Fragrance once made an aspiration in the following words. What was that aspiration he made? It was this: "Whatever sons or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle of the bodhisattvas and who hold my name — may they obtain these qualities: in every birth after birth, may they remember their past lives and live in purity of conduct; may their bodies be beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being; may they appear and travel to other buddha-fields; and may I too perfect their awakening as buddhas. If this great earth were filled with fire, may that fire be extinguished and may precious jewels arise for them. May the minds of sentient beings who make requests never be cut short. May they become irreversible with regard to the unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening. In thirty thousand aeons may they turn back from cyclic existence. And may they fully acquire an accumulation of merit." Thus did he offer that prayer.

Great Kāśyapa, in the southern direction, beyond world-realms equal in number to the grains of sand in eight rivers Ganges from this buddha-field, there is a world-realm in which a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly complete buddha by the name of Most Excellent Jewel dwells and abides at this very moment. Great Kāśyapa, whatever sons or daughters of good family who have genuinely entered the Great Vehicle of the bodhisattvas and who hold the name of that Tathāgata, that arhat, that perfectly complete buddha Most Excellent Jewel — they will remember their past lives in every birth within existence. While still dwelling in the womb, they will be beheld by the blessed buddhas; they will behold the blessed buddhas and bring them joy. In just the same way, from the mouths of those blessed buddhas will come the words: "Son of good family, you have definitively emerged toward the unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening. Son of good family, you are irreversible from the unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening. Son of good family, even while you are still dwelling in the womb, you will ripen gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and others toward the unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening. In one thousand aeons you will turn back from cyclic existence." They will fully acquire an immeasurable accumulation of merit.

Great Kāśyapa, in the western direction, beyond world-realms equal in number to the grains of sand in three rivers Ganges from this buddha-field, there is a world-realm called Well and Excellently Discerned. In that realm there dwells and abides at this very moment a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly complete buddha by the name of Great Blazing Power.

Great Kāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have entered upon the Great Vehicle bear in mind the name of that Blessed One, that Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Great Blazing Power — when they are born in future existences they will remember their past lives. They will also attain a bodhisattva meditative absorption called Glorious Splendor of the Solar Disc's Radiance, and abiding in that absorption they will behold buddha-fields as numerous as the grains of sand in a river Ganges, and will behold the Blessed Ones, the buddhas, who dwell in those fields.

Great Kāśyapa, such are the qualities and the benefits of those qualities that will arise for bodhisattvas who are like the Invincible One.

Great Kāśyapa, any woman who bears in mind the name of that Tathāgata — this will be her final existence as a woman. After dying she will obtain existence as a man. Thus, bearing in mind the name of the Tathāgata Great Blazing Power is something of great consequence.

Thereupon the Blessed One at that time spoke these verses:

When a woman hears the name of that great sage,
her existence as a woman is transformed and she becomes the existence of a wise man.
She will attain the supreme awakening for the benefit of all embodied beings,
and will become a refuge and an ally for the world together with its gods.

Great Kāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have entered upon the Great Vehicle bear in mind this name — when they are born in future existences they will remember their past lives. For immeasurable aeons they will turn back from cyclic existence. For them an immeasurable accumulation of merit will arise, and they will draw near to the attainment of unsurpassed, perfectly complete awakening.

Great Kāśyapa, in the northern direction, beyond this buddha-field, there dwells and abides at this very moment a Tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly complete buddha by the name of Precious and Supreme.

Great Kāśyapa, whatever sons of good family or daughters of good family who have entered upon the Great Vehicle bear in mind the name of that Blessed One, that Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Precious and Supreme — they will generate great merit. Great Kāśyapa, if a son or daughter of good family who has entered upon the Great Vehicle were to offer, present, and donate to the Blessed Ones, the buddhas, a heap of gold as great as the king of mountains, Mount Meru, and were to go on making such an offering for a trillion years — even so this would not come within a hundredth part, not a thousandth part, not a hundred-thousandth part, not within any count, reckoning, or comparison of the root of virtue constituted by this complete retention of a buddha's name. If there is a supreme possession for those who bear in mind the name of the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Precious and Supreme, it is this very thing alone.

Thereupon the Blessed One at that time spoke these verses:

Those who are the protectors of the world, makers of light,
who through their knowledge of what is timely and untimely benefit all sentient beings,
who dwell supremely in the eastern, southern, western, and northern directions —
to those chiefs of beings, day and night,
with reverence, pressing your palms together, pay homage.

Whatever noble persons arise once in a thousand aeons —

supremely rare — and even toward them,
what supernormal knowledge does one possess through having paid homage?
Whoever wishes to pay honor to the buddhas
and desires perfect awakening —
let such a one listen to these names of the buddhas
as proclaimed by the Victors.
One who arouses wisdom toward the buddhas
should never harbor doubt,
for through that root of virtue
one will attain this wisdom beyond measure.

Whoever always wishes to make
offerings beyond measure to the buddhas —
let that one, upon hearing the names of the buddhas,
then proclaim them to others.

Whoever wishes to liberate
tens of millions of sentient beings
from conditioned existence —
if that one but hears the names of the buddhas,
such a one will not take birth merely as a human.

Whoever wishes to shake
tens of millions of world-fields with a single toe —
let that one, upon hearing the names of the buddhas,
proclaim them to the many.

Whoever holds these names of the buddhas
and thereby makes offerings to the many Victors, the guides —
it is not by one birth, not by ten, not by twenty
that the merit of such a one is exhausted.

Even if this world were filled to the brim with treasures of golden hue
as numerous as the sands of the Ganges and offered up —
whoever hears the supreme names of the buddhas,
that heap of giving could not approach even a hundredth part of it.

Whoever hears and holds these names of the buddhas —
they have found, and found well, the supreme excellence of human birth.
In that human world, endowed with the faculty of melodious speech,
they find the going-forth well, find good food, and practice well.

When the Blessed One had spoken these words, those monks, those bodhisattvas, the Elder Mahākāśyapa, and the world together with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced at what the Blessed One had taught and gave it great praise.

From the Vast Sūtra of the Great Vehicle, the Great Vehicle sūtra called The Noble Crown Ornament of the Buddhas, this great doctrinal compendium is complete.

Translated by the Indian preceptor Śākyasiṃha and the Tibetan translator monk Devendrakṣita, collated and established in final form.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The colophon names three figures: the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, and the Tibetan chief editor-translator Ye shes sde, who was among the most prominent lotsāwas of the imperial period. The phrase "great editor-translator" (zhu chen gyi lo tsā ba) designates a senior reviser of canonical translations.

The term rendered "smell-eaters" (gandharvas) refers to a class of semi-divine beings who subsist on fragrances; the Tibetan "dri za" is a calque of the Sanskrit.  The buddha-name rendered "Possessed of the Noble Body Complete with All Excellent Marks of Glory" translates a compound that could alternatively be parsed as "Having a Body Adorned with All Noble Excellent Marks of Glory." The rendering chosen reflects the most natural reading of the Tibetan syntax. The passage ends mid-sentence, as the source text itself breaks off at that point.  The phrase rendered "reluctant regarding their marks and excellent features" translates a somewhat compressed Tibetan construction. The sense is that such practitioners will not be diffident or hesitant when it comes to explaining the major and minor marks of a great being — their eloquence will be unfailing on this topic. The same word for reluctance or hesitation governs both the clause about marks and the later clause about unheard teachings, and this has been rendered accordingly.  The seven jewels of the limbs of awakening are the seven factors of awakening (bodhyaṅgas): mindfulness, discernment of phenomena, diligence, joy, pliancy, meditative absorption, and equanimity. The text's phrasing "jewels of the limbs of awakening" is an unusual formulation likely treating each factor metaphorically as a precious jewel; the translation follows the Tibetan literally.  The aspiration of King of Limitless Supreme Fragrance specifies thirty-five thousand aeons in the framing passage above but only thirty thousand aeons within the body of the vow itself. This discrepancy is present in the Tibetan and likely reflects a textual variation within the source manuscript rather than a translation error; both figures have been rendered exactly as they appear.  The verse fragment at the very end is incomplete in the passage supplied; the translation renders exactly what is present in the Tibetan without adding material from beyond the supplied text.

The epithet rendered "the Invincible One" translates mi pham pa, which is both a common bodhisattva epithet meaning "unconquerable" or "invincible" and the name Ajita (an epithet of Maitreya). Here it functions as a general epithet for a class of bodhisattvas ("those resembling the Invincible One"), so it has been rendered descriptively rather than as a proper name.  The closing phrase "they will not take birth merely as a human" in the verse about liberating tens of millions is ambiguous: it may mean the practitioner transcends ordinary human rebirth, attaining something higher, or that they will not be confined to human rebirth alone. The Tibetan is open to either reading; the higher-birth interpretation is the more standard doctrinal one in this genre of buddha-name sūtras.

The verse "not by one birth, not by ten, not by twenty" indicates that the merit of the one who holds these names and makes offerings to the Victors is inexhaustible — the negatives are building toward the positive point that such merit vastly surpasses any finite reckoning.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
