The Noble Great Cloud (Ārya Mahāmegha)

Toh 235 in the Kangyur is known in English as The Noble Great Cloud, in Sanskrit as the Ārya Mahāmegha, and in Tibetan as the འཕགས་པ་སྤྲིན་ཆེན་པོ (Phakpa Trin Chenpo). It is a Mahāyāna sūtra centered on the teachings and blessings associated with rain-clouds, nāgas, and the power of the Buddha's compassion to bring spiritual and worldly benefit, much as great clouds bring life-giving rain to the earth. The text opens with the Buddha dwelling in a magnificent jeweled cloud palace alongside a vast assembly of monks, bodhisattvas, and an extensive gathering of nāga kings — beings traditionally associated with water, rainfall, and the fertility of the natural world — signaling that the sūtra addresses themes of cosmic abundance, protection, and the Buddha's sovereign influence over both human and non-human realms. As Toh 235, it belongs to the sūtra section of the Kangyur, the collection of canonical teachings attributed to the Buddha himself.

Thus it was established and composed.

In the language of India: Ārya Mahāmegha. In the language of Tibet: The Noble Great Cloud.

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling together with the nāga king Nandaka and Upanandaka, in the palace of the great maṇḍala of clouds at the essence-core of glorious precious jewels — a multistoried mansion — accompanied by a great assembly of monks, a great assembly of bodhisattvas, and a great gathering of nāga kings, namely: the nāga king Nandaka; Upananda; Sāgara; Anavatapta; Tejin; Varuṇa; Sthita; Virūpākṣa; the son of Dhanavardhana; the nāga king Takṣaka; the son of Pṛthivīrakṣita; Mṛdu; Śrī-Tejas; Śubha; Vidyut-mālā; Ratnośīrṣa; Ratnagarbha; Prabhāsaśikhin; Śikhin-indracāpa; the nāga king Śakra-dhvaja; Indra-stūpa; Jambū-dhvaja; Maṅgala; Mahā-maṇḍalin; Mahā-hasta-cara; Nakṣatra-varṇa; Candra-tejas; Śrī-mati; Candra-darśin; the nāga king Sudarśana; Susthira; Kaṇṭhe-ratna; Megha-ja; Dhārā-dhara; Pramardana; Vipramardana; Bala-saṃpanna; Mahā-gāmbhīrya; Gambhīra-svara; the nāga king Mahā-ghoṣa; Vipra-ghoṣa; Utpala; Mahā-vikrama; Śarādhara; Nānā-sena; Mahā-pāśa; the nāga king Elapattra; Samanta-prabhā; Karkaśa-karṇa; Śaṅkha; Daradara; the nāga king Upadara-dara; Sukha-kara; Hasta-cara; Mahā-hasta-cara; Mahā-gandha; Uḍḍīna; Śalya-malla; Lambana; Kṛmī-sthāna; Kṛṣṇa; the nāga king Indra-sena; Jalambuka; Upajala-mbuka; Śaṅkha-dhara; Kha-cara; Sudarśana; Hastin-āsa; Tīkṣṇa; Pāṇḍu; Vidyud-jvala; Mahā-vidyut-prabhā; Bala-deva; Jala-bala; the nāga king Sad-āvṛta; Amṛta; Tīrthika; Vaiḍūrya-prabhā; Suvarṇa-ghoṣa; Suvarṇa-prabhā; Candra-dhvaja-prabhā; Sūryābhā; Udaya-prabhā; Meṣa-śīrṣa; the nāga king Śveta; Kṛṣṇa; Yama; Śramaṇa; Maṇḍūka; Haṃsa-tejas; Valaya-dhara; Pṛthivī-dhara; Sahasra-śīrṣa; Mūrdhna-ratna; the nāga king Arthā-darśin; Mahā-megha; Susenā; Bhūmi-pāla; Manuṣya-datta; Vinīta; Jarā-utpatti; Makara-kumbhīra; Makara-kumbhīra-mukha; Viṣa-dhara; the nāga king Āśu-viṣa; Padmaka; Praveśa; Pralambin; Bhayaṃkara; Śrī-tejas-mañjarī; Pañca-śīrṣa; Valli-ra; Ratha-jaya; the nāga king Guru; the nāga king Dīrgha-puccha; Mahā-śīrṣa; Bimbika; Vitara; Śīghra-cara; the nāga king Tri-śīrṣa; Nāga-sena; Mahā-tejas; Jalambuka-datta; the nāga king Trāsaka; Jvala-prabhā; Sapta-śīrṣa; Mahā-stambha; Darśanīya; Mahā-pracaṇḍa; Vimala-tejas; Sundara-akṣa; Mahā-raudra; Prabhā-skandha;

the nāga king Raudra; Krodhā-drāgśuladhara; Ratna-vāri-da; Vāri-da-mahā-megha; Indra-prabhā; Pādāpāna; Megha-candra; Sāgara-megha; Puṣpa-mahā-gandha; Kumuda-prabhava; the nāga king Ratna-netra; Mahā-stūpa-dhvaja; Megha-mahā-sāra; Himavat; Śrī-sāra; Megha-bala; Rātri-dhara; Vāri-da; Mahā-vāri-da; the nāga king Tejas-agni-sama; Megheśvara-rāja; Akrodha; Pṛthivī-kumbha; Nāga-vīra; Vāri-dhara; Megha-chattra; Ingara-mukha; Tejasvin; Megha-prādurbhūta; the nāga king Ananta-vikrama; Svarūpa-sundara; Mahā-kāya; Śṛgāla-udara; Śānta; Vīra; Suvarṇa-gandha; Parama-udyata; Viṣa-tīkṣṇa; Svara-mañju; the nāga king Amṛta-sāra; Mahā-pravṛṣṭa; Visphuliṅga; Kalasvara; Dundubhi-svara; Amṛta-dhārā; Prīti-kara; Megha-nādin; Vīra-sena; Anapatya; Sāgara-gulma; the nāga king Vakra — together with these and all such great nāga kings, eighty-four hundred thousand trillion nāgas assembled and were present there together.

At that time those nāga kings, together with their retinues, rose from their seats, arranged their upper robes over one shoulder, placed the right knee on the ground, and, turning toward where the Blessed One was, joined their palms together in reverence, bowed in homage to the Teacher, and with great prostration offered to the Blessed One flowers, incense, fragrant substances, garlands, unguents, powders, garments, parasols, victory banners, pennants, silk streamers, the sounds of music, cymbals, kettledrums, songs and melodies, jeweled flowers, jeweled streamers, pearl garlands, nāga flowers, and exquisitely beautiful pearl-nets of countless and immeasurable kinds and varieties. Having circumambulated him, they took their seats to one side.

Seated to one side, they made these aspirations:

With a body as vast as an ocean — equal in number to the finest atoms of all the oceans of world-realms — let there arise, from every single atom of all the maṇḍala-oceans of the assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas, of all the countless oceans of world-realms, and of all the finest atoms of earth, water, fire, and wind, and of all the finest atoms of everything that appears as form — from each and every one of those finest atoms, clouds of bodies, utterly transcending in number all the countless, immeasurable, inconceivable, matchless, immeasurable, and inexpressible oceans of enumerable oceans — and from each of those bodies, let there emerge clouds of hands streaming forth in continuous flow in every direction, immeasurable and countless, consecrated through blessing, so that from each and every particle of those finest atoms there billows a great ocean of clouds of every kind of offering, filling and pervading the ground in all directions — unmixed, each distinct — so as to make offering to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. In just this way, may immeasurable, countless, inconceivable, immeasurable, boundless, and inexpressible unmixed ocean-clouds of the ever-active bodies, consecrated through blessing, cover and fill the entire expanse of space — so that those ocean-clouds of the bodies of bodhisattvas, exactly as they are, bring forth, from each finest atom, the colors of all precious jewels, dense rays of light, the sun,

ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of retinues of bodies like all the moons, and garlands of all precious jewels, and ocean-clouds of flowers, and ocean-clouds of towered palaces that are the essence of the great radiance of all precious jewels, and ocean-clouds of treasuries of all fragrant woods and wish-granting trees, and ocean-clouds displaying all forms of every kind of incense and perfume, and ocean-clouds of the sounds of music resounding with every sound, and ocean-clouds of forests of trees of every fragrance — all of these, consecrated through blessing, cover and fill the entire expanse of space; and by these and all such ocean-clouds of every offering, immeasurable, countless, inconceivable, beyond measure, boundless, and inexpressible, unmixed each from the other, may reverence be shown, may veneration be offered, may honor be rendered, and may worship be made to all the ocean-assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Consecrated through blessing so as to cover and fill the entire expanse of space, ocean-clouds of jewel-kings that are the essence of luminous radiance, arrayed in every realm — by these may reverence be shown, may veneration be offered, may honor be rendered, and may worship be made to all the ocean-assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of jewel-kings arrayed as a rain of precious jewels whose radiance illuminates everything everywhere; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings of melodious sound — blazing with streaming light of all precious jewels, ascertained as belonging to the buddhas — filling all with their resonance; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings rich in melody with the voices of all the Dharmas of the buddhas, filling everything with sound; and ocean-clouds that, through beams of light from precious jewel-gateways on every side, reveal the appearances of the buddhas' emanations; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings displaying all appearances arrayed throughout each and every unmixed maṇḍala of the retinue; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings of streaming lamp-light that follow after and pervade all the buddha-fields; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings that display all appearances of the Tathāgatas' palace-temples throughout the inconceivable buddha-fields; and ocean-clouds of jewel-kings that make brilliantly manifest the forms of the buddhas of the three times upon the finest atoms of all manner of precious jewels — all of these, consecrated through blessing so as to cover and fill the entire expanse of space, may by all these ocean-clouds of buddhas and bodhisattvas: reverence be shown, veneration be offered, honor be rendered, and worship be made.

And ocean-clouds of unmixed towered palaces fashioned of every kind of jewel, incense, and manifold flower; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces supremely adorned with jewel-kings of endless colors; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces bearing jewel-lamps and streaming incense-light; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces adorned throughout with every pearl; and ocean-clouds of the pollen of all flowers; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces beautifully ornamented with endless garlands of precious jewels — all of these, consecrated through blessing so as to cover and fill the entire expanse of space; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces that are the essence of the light-rays' radiance in all ten directions, gathering together perfectly every adornment; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces supremely adorned with the finest atoms of all precious jewels, displaying the many adornments everywhere;

and ocean-clouds of towered palaces supremely adorned with all adornments, completely filling and pervading all space; and ocean-clouds of towered palaces hung at every gate with flower-petal stairways and networks of tinkling bells — all of these consecrated through blessing to cover and fill the entire expanse of space, to be presented as a seat of honour, to be raised up as supreme, to be depicted in image, and to be offered to all ocean-vast assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of gold and garlands of various precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart displaying every manner of flower-like radiance; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of the gold of the Anavatapta and the river Jambu; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of the lamp of precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of lotuses that are the radiant victory-banners of glowing precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of various lotuses adorned with precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of the Anavatapta blazing in beautiful rays of light; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart possessed of blazing rays of inexhaustible splendour; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart from which all blazing jewels arise; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart from which all supreme and excellent blazing jewels arise; and ocean-clouds of distinct, unmixed lion thrones with a lotus heart endowed with the rays of the light of a buddha's spoken word — all of these consecrated through blessing to cover and fill the entire expanse of space, to be presented as a seat of honour, to be raised up as supreme, to be depicted in image, and to be offered to all ocean-vast assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of incense-trees and jewel-trees of every kind; and ocean-clouds of incense-trees from whose every leaf and gate clouds of incense arise like joined palms pressed together; and ocean-clouds of trees displaying the boundless forms of all trees together with every adornment; and ocean-clouds of trees like clouds from which hang down clouds of every flower; and ocean-clouds of trees possessed of inexhaustible treasuries from which every adornment springs forth; and ocean-clouds of trees illuminating the maṇḍalas of every jewel-radiance; and ocean-clouds of trees displaying the powdered sandalwood of every kind, reaching to the bodies of the bodhisattvas; and ocean-clouds of trees possessed of inconceivable blazing adornments of all awakening-hearts, possessed of a treasury of all precious garments made to shine like the sun; and ocean-clouds of trees that proclaim all sounds and tones, sending forth every pleasing melody; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a lotus heart of jewels with boundless colours; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart that illuminates the king of jewels, fully manifest in all directions; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart supremely adorned with all ornaments and adornments;

and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of garlands of lamps radiating light of various precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart from which jewel-trees resounding with every sound spring forth on all sides; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of garlands of all incense, flowers, and lotuses set with precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of a king of precious jewels fully displaying everywhere the arrayed seats of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of precious jewel-clouds, beautifully adorned with stairways whose balustrades are strung with garlands of every adornment; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of trunks of every kind, possessing branches of precious jewels and treasuries of pollen; and ocean-clouds of lion thrones with a heart of nets of various incense and jewel-bell garlands adorning all sides, making the sun shine bright — all these consecrated by blessing so as to cover the entire expanse of the sky in every direction, as honour, as supreme refuge, as portrait, and as offering to all the oceans of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of palatial mansions of all kings of wish-fulfilling jewels; and ocean-clouds of canopies adorned with arrangements of flowers with stamens of indranīla; and ocean-clouds of canopies of all incense and precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of canopies shaped as lamps radiating light of precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of canopies of a king of melodious jewels that appears to display the miraculous powers of the buddhas; and ocean-clouds of canopies displaying every illumination of arrangements of garments made of various precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of precious canopies appearing as blazing rivers of all flowers; and ocean-clouds of canopies of nets filled and pervaded in every direction with the sound of various bells; and ocean-clouds of canopies of lotus-nets with a precious jewel heart, blazing with lotus flowers appearing in boundless colours of every variety; and ocean-clouds of canopies of victory banners appearing as rays of light with golden stamens; and ocean-clouds of canopies of all adornments arranged with boundless light appearing as inconceivable adornments — all these consecrated by blessing so as to cover the entire expanse of the sky in every direction, as honour, as supreme refuge, as portrait, and as offering to all the oceans of vast clouds of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of parasols of every variety of precious jewels consecrated by blessing so as to cover the entire expanse of the sky in every direction; and ocean-clouds of flower parasols arranged with the appearance of rays of light from the ten precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of parasols that are treasuries of pearls of boundless colours; and ocean-clouds of parasols of a king of jewels whose sound at the gateway of compassion belongs to all buddhas and bodhisattvas; and ocean-clouds of parasols of garlands radiating light of various precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of parasols with hanging nets of bells excellently adorned with the appearance of jewel dust pervading all sides; and ocean-clouds of parasols adorned with branches of trunks of all precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of parasols of a king of precious jewels radiating light that causes the sun to illuminate, together with all incense and perfumes; and ocean-clouds of parasols filled and pervaded in every direction with a treasury of sandalwood powder;

and ocean-clouds of unmixed parasols filled and pervaded with the great broad realm of buddhas made luminous through all its adornments — by all these may homage be rendered, may veneration be offered, may the image be honored, may worship be performed to all the ocean-vast assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of unmixed maṇḍalas of light of all luminous precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of unmixed maṇḍalas of light of the forms and radiance of all jewels that pour forth light; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light that illuminate with the radiance of flowers; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light possessed of the maṇḍala of light of the emanation-rays of all precious jewels, which are the emanations of buddhas; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light belonging to the illumination of all buddha realms in their entirety; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light of branches of precious jewels that everywhere proclaim the realm of the buddhas through every gateway; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light of the rays of lapis lazuli, of all classes of precious jewels, and of every king of precious gems; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light that display in every instant of mind the boundless forms of sentient beings; and ocean-clouds of maṇḍalas of light endowed with pleasing sounds that utterly arise from the aspirations of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of unmixed maṇḍalas of light of kings of melodious jewels that tame sentient beings throughout all surrounding maṇḍalas — by all these may homage be rendered, may veneration be offered, may the image be honored, may worship be performed to all the ocean-vast assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of rays of light from the treasury of all precious gems; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of the form, sound, fragrance, taste, and touch of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of rays of light pouring forth from all precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of rays of light filled and pervaded with the proclamation of the Dharma of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of rays of light that illuminate all the adornments of buddha realms; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of all tiered palaces of flowers; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of the dust of all precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of rays of light resounding with the declaration that buddhas appear in every successive age from eon to eon and ripen all sentient beings to full maturation; and ocean-clouds of rays of light displaying all inexhaustible precious jewels, together with the radiance of the anthers of all flowers; and ocean-clouds of unmixed rays of light that everywhere display every kind of arranged throne and seat — by all these may homage be rendered, may veneration be offered, may the image be honored, may worship be performed to all the ocean-vast assemblies of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

And ocean-clouds of unmixed rays of precious jewel light of boundless colors; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of kings of jewels of universal radiance; and ocean-clouds of rays of light that make luminous the vast adornments of the realms of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of all incenses and perfumes; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of all adornments; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of the emanations of all buddhas; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of the anthers of trees of variegated precious jewels; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of all garments; and ocean-clouds of rays of light of kings of melodious jewels of the boundless conduct of bodhisattvas; and ocean-clouds of unmixed rays of light of all pearl lamps — by all these may homage be rendered,

— by all these may homage be rendered to all the buddhas and to all the ocean-clouds of the assemblies of bodhisattvas of vast rivers, may they be honored, may they be venerated, may they be worshipped.

Having made such aspirational prayers, those nāga kings circumambulated the Blessed One three times, prostrated at his feet, and, having received his leave, each took their seat.

At that time the great sovereign lord of nāgas of the great trichiliocosm, he who is possessed of the power of irreversible aspiration, whose name is King Canopy-like Maṇḍala of Splendor Arrayed in Ocean-Clouds of Retinues Boundless as the Sea, came to this Jambudvīpa in order to make offerings to the Tathāgata, to pay homage to him, to honor him, and to hear the Dharma.

Then the lord of nāgas, King Canopy-like Maṇḍala of Splendor Arrayed in Ocean-Clouds of Retinues Boundless as the Sea, rose from his seat, arranged his outer robe over one shoulder, placed the knee of his right leg on the ground, turned toward the Blessed One, joined his palms in reverence, and addressed the Blessed One in these words: "If I were to ask a question, and the Blessed One were to grant me the occasion to ask it so that it might be prophesied, I would venture to ask the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly and fully awakened buddha, something on a few matters."

When this was said, the Blessed One declared to the lord of nāgas, King Canopy-like Maṇḍala of Splendor Arrayed in Ocean-Clouds of Retinues Boundless as the Sea: "Lord of nāgas, ask whatever you wish. Whatever you ask, I shall prophesy concerning it and thereby gladden your mind."

When this was declared, the lord of nāgas, King Canopy-like Maṇḍala of Splendor Arrayed in Ocean-Clouds of Retinues Boundless as the Sea, addressed the Blessed One with these words: "Blessed One, how is it that all the sufferings of all nāgas throughout all the nāga realms may be brought to an end? How may they come to be endowed with every happiness and to greatly rejoice? How may rain fall in continuous streams upon this Jambudvīpa at the proper seasons? How may all grasses, creeping plants, medicinal herbs, and forests spring forth? How may all grains grow? How may all essences arise in their fullness? And through what means may the humans of Jambudvīpa be endowed with happiness?"

When this was said, the Blessed One declared to the lord of nāgas, King Canopy-like Maṇḍala of Splendor Arrayed in Ocean-Clouds of Retinues Boundless as the Sea:

"Excellent! Excellent, lord of nāgas! It is admirable that, out of concern for the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings, you have inquired of the Tathāgata about this matter. Therefore, lord of nāgas, listen well and take it to heart, for I shall explain it to you.

Lord of nāgas, if one is endowed with a single quality, all the suffering of all nāgas throughout all nāga realms will be cut off and they will be endowed with happiness. What is that single quality? It is this: loving-kindness.

Lord of nāgas, gods and humans who abide in loving-kindness will not be burned by fire, will not be harmed by weapons, will not be swept away by water, will not be harmed by poison, will not be overpowered by the armies of enemies. They will lie down to sleep in happiness and awaken in happiness. They will be fully protected by their own merit. They will shine with the splendor of great merit. They will not be despised by the world with its gods. They will be beautiful and pleasing to behold. They will move unobstructed through all destinies. All suffering will be cut off and they will greatly rejoice. They will be endowed with every happiness and, having realized the supreme qualities of human existence, after the dissolution of the body they will be born in the Brahmā world. Lord of nāgas, these are the benefits for those gods and humans who abide in loving-kindness.

Therefore, lord of nāgas, one should abide in the bodily actions of loving-kindness, the verbal actions of loving-kindness, and the mental actions of loving-kindness.

Lord of nāgas, furthermore, one should recite the dhāraṇī called Bestower of All Happiness. It cuts off all the suffering of all nāgas throughout all nāga realms, bestows every happiness, causes rain to fall in continuous streams upon this Jambudvīpa at the proper seasons, and causes all grasses, creeping plants, medicinal herbs, forests, and crops to grow.

Lord of nāgas, what then is this dhāraṇī called Bestower of All Happiness? It is this:

tadyathā, ghaṇi dhāraṇi, uddhāraṇi, sampraktiṣṭhite, vijayavarṇa, satya-pratijñā-saradā, jñānavatī, utpadani vināmani, abhiṣecani, abhivyāhāra, śubhavati, jīmatu, ehi kumavālan, bahahara, kleśān dhunapāvama, śodhaya mārgaṇa, nirāhika dharmātā śuddhā, lokavitimirarāja saduḥkha, śamana sarvabuddha avalokana adhiṣṭhite, prajñājñāna bhe svāhā.

Lord of nāgas, this dhāraṇī called Bestower of All Happiness, which accomplishes the meaning of every syllable of the dhāraṇī, which enters into the dharmakāya, which has been blessed by all buddhas — this is to be held and recited.

Lord of nāgas, furthermore, one should invoke and contemplate the names of the Tathāgatas born of the family of clouds, those who are the Manifestation of the Essence of Blessings Issuing from the Cloud Family, who make luminous the emanation of the essence of splendor, who are the glorious maṇḍala of cloud-streams of the water of the crest of wisdom, who illuminate with golden rays of light, and whose lineage and clan arose from a single strand of hair. By doing so, all the nāgas of every class, clan, lineage, and assemblage of nāgas, from every nāga element and every nāga birthplace, all nāga kings, all nāga daughters, and all nāga attendants will have all their nāga suffering cut off and all the requisites of happiness will be brought to fulfilment.

Lord of nāgas, what then are those names of the Tathāgatas? They are these:

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, Vairocana, the one who has the nature of the Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata born of the nāga lineage, adorned magnificently by clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud Water-Bearer."

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Glorious Splendor of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arising of the Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud that Utterly Destroys All Maṇḍalas of Wind.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, Immeasurable Sky.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Assembly of Lightning Blazing from the Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Courageous Hero of Great Cloud Power.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Beautiful Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Dense Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Maṇḍala of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Light of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Lion.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Canopy.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Lovely Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Covered by the Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, who resoundingly proclaims throughout the ten directions the maṇḍala of drum-sound that illuminates what arises from clouds, covering the heights.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud of Cool Arising, utterly destroying what is unwelcome, resounding with a deep sound.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Spread Wide.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud of the Waters of the Ganges.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Courageous Hero Like a Cloud in Power.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Proclaimer of Thunder.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Displayer of All Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Vast Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Dripping Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Fully Resounding Like a Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Risen Like a Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Clothed in Garments Like a Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Who Brings Forth Crops Through Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Abiding in the Abode of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud of Rain Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Who Gathers Clouds Together.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Fully Expanded Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Utpala Lotus.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud of Fragrant Body.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Exalted Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Sovereign Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Maker of Light.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud of Blessings.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Like a Great Cloud of Precious Jewels.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Utterly Vanquishing Like a Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the River of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Gatherer of Clouds.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Utterly Destroying of Untimely Clouds and Hailstorms.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Who Proclaimed upon Beholding the Sky Like a Great Cloud.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud That Gives Forth Sound.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud Born of Rain.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud That Achieves Gentle Splendor.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud of Water Possessed of the Six Flavors.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud That Scatters Rain.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Great Cloud That Fills the Ocean.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the One Who Covers All with Clouds When Rain Does Not Fall.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Cloud Form That Is Boundless.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the arhat and perfectly complete buddha — the Great Cloud That Accomplishes All, the Splendor of the Cloud of Jambudvīpa, the One Who Makes Brilliant Light, Possessed of Cloud Rays.

By reciting these names of the Tathāgatas, O Lord of Nāgas, all the suffering of all nāgas is cut off without remainder, they come to be endowed with every happiness, and throughout this Jambudvīpa the continuous flow of rain falls in season, causing grass, creeping plants, medicinal herbs, forests, and all crops to grow.

Then the Lord of Nāgas of the great trichiliocosm — the king known as Umbrella-Like Maṇḍala of Glory with an Array of Clouds Like a Boundless Ocean of Retinue — addressed a request to the Blessed One: Blessed One, in the final age and the final time, when in this Jambudvīpa rain does not fall, what is it that, when recited, causes a great continuous flow of rain to descend? And at a time of unbearable conditions, and at a time when harm arises, and at a time when people quarrel on account of wrongful things, and at a time of epidemic disease and the arising of harm, and at a time of sickness and death, and at a time when inauspicious constellations abide — that which utterly pacifies all epidemic disease, harm, and danger — please teach the bases of the dhāraṇī-mantras of such a kind. May they be blessed with the blessing of the buddhas. Please teach those that will properly urge on all nāgas, that will cause all the gods to greatly rejoice, that will utterly destroy all māras, that will dispel all fears of all sentient beings, that will avert all harm, that will bring peace and wellbeing, that will utterly pacify what has been done by inauspicious constellations, that will clear away all five obstacles to rain of which the Blessed One has spoken, and that will cause the continuous flow of rain to fall well throughout this Jambudvīpa — please, Blessed One, you who are supremely endowed with compassion, you who are endowed with loving care for the benefit of all sentient beings, teach the bases of the dhāraṇī-mantras of such a kind. Blessed One, I make this request to the Tathāgata.

When this had been said, the Blessed One spoke thus to the king of nāgas, Umbrella-Like Maṇḍala of Glory with an Array of Clouds Like a Boundless Ocean of Retinue: Excellent, excellent, O Lord of Nāgas! It is good that you make this request to the Tathāgata for the sake, benefit, and happiness of all sentient beings. O Lord of Nāgas, therefore listen well and take it to heart: the dhāraṇī called Courageous Pinnacle, Bearer of the Sound of a Great Dragon Arisen from Great Compassion, proclaimed by all buddhas for the sake, benefit, and happiness of all sentient beings —

— consecrated. The rejoicing is now to be declared: it brings rain when there is no rain; when rain has been excessive, it completely pacifies the harm of destructive flooding; it rouses all nāgas; it satisfies all gods; it utterly vanquishes all māras; and it causes all sentient beings to be endowed with every happiness.

Tadyathā: mahājñāna avabhāsāni śrī tejolakṣmī vṛṣṭi vikrama vajrasiṃhatane parama virāja nirmala guṇaketu sūryaprabhā vimalāṅgayaṣṭi bhara bhara sambhara sambhara dudumbhu hana hana mahāprabhe vibhūta mahāmahoandhaṭāre prajñāgra śuddhe paripūrṇa maitri maitrā viraṇa skandha maitrāma buddhe jala jala jala jala jalaṃ buddhe bodhyad ga kusume daśabale caturveśvara dhī aṣṭādaśa apaniga buddhadharme śubhamadi puṇyarāśi śukladharma samanvite gambhīre virajase vimale viśiṣṭa prāpte nirāsrapa dharme sarvalokajyeṣṭha jyeṣṭha para pravare anuttare asaṅge dhara dhara dhiri dhiri dhuru dhura śānta mate śānta vege cara cara cara cara ciri ciri curu curu parama buddhānumate mahāprajñāpāramite svāhā.

Homage to the Tathāgata Vairocana, possessed of an ocean of wisdom. Homage to all buddhas and all bodhisattvas.

Then, in order to bring down rain here upon Jambudvīpa, the essence of all nāgas is to be recited. By the truth of all buddhas and all bodhisattvas, the five obstacles that prevent rain are to be removed.

Sadyā thedan: sara sara siri siri suru suru nāgānān jaba jaba jibi jibi jubu jubu — great nāgas, come here! By the truth of the buddhas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa.

Cara cara ciri ciri curu curu — great lords of nāgas, come here! O great nāgas! By the truth of the buddhas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa.

Bara bara biri biri buru buru — by the truth of the buddhas, let all nāgas be summoned.

With the mind of loving-kindness, with the mind of compassion, with the mind of joy, with the mind of equanimity, and by the blessing, truth, and great loving-kindness of all buddhas and all bodhisattvas — great lords of nāgas, come here! Recollect the buddhas, the Dharma of the buddhas, and the qualities of the bodhisattvas.

Bhara bhara bhiri bhiri bhuru bhuru — the retinue of the great beings, bearing the waters of great rivers and the waters of clouds, come here with minds of loving-kindness. Recollect the sublime teaching of the Teacher.

Ghaḍa ghaḍa ghiḍi ghiḍi ghuḍu ghuḍu — those who are fierce and wrathful, possessed of great force, those who thrust out their great venomous tongues, come here with minds of loving-kindness. By the truth of all Tathāgatas, let rain fall here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā.

Taṭa taṭa tiṭi tiṭi tuṭu tuṭu — those who bear great jeweled crowns upon their heads and bear the forms of terrible serpents, recollect the blessing of the Three Jewels, and by the truth of Vajradhara, let rain fall here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā.

Kala kala kili kili kulu kulu — those who dwell in great waters, who have mounted a chariot of heaped great clouds and travel forth upon it, come here! With minds of loving-kindness, let a stream of rain pour forth here upon Jambudvīpa. By the truth of the Tathāgatas and the blessing of the Tathāgatas, this is proclaimed by Vajrapāṇi.

Rala rala rili rili rulu rulu —

Rala rala rili rili rulu rulu — you who travel by hand, all of you, without sleeping, by the truth of the Tathāgatas of the three times: Gha ma gha ma, ghi mi ghi mi, ghu mu ghu mu. Svāhā. Let all nāgas be summoned. With a mind of loving-kindness, with the awakening mind (bodhicitta) going before: Na ra na ra, ni ri ni ri, nu ru nu ru. Svāhā. Let there be summoned the great serpents of many twisted forms, with hollow heads, with red heads and red eyes, the mighty great serpents of vast power.

Ho! Ho! You who travel by hand, great ones, supremely compassionate, resplendent with the splendor of all merit, free from affliction — recollect the blessing of the Tathāgatas! Ga ṭa ga ṭa, gi ṭi gi ṭi, gu ṭu gu ṭu. Svāhā. You who are endowed with power, with supremacy over adversaries, and with unobstructed splendor — let streams of rain fall here upon Jambudvīpa!

Śa ra śa ra, śi ri śi ri, śu ru śu ru. Svāhā. Ho! Ho! Great nāgas, recollect your own clans and lineages, and without delay, by the blessing of the truth of all the gods, let streams of rain fall here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the blessing of the truth of Brahmā, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the truth of Śakra (Indra), let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the truth of the Four Great Kings, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the truth of the eight great nāgas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of those who have entered the stream, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of those who return once, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of those who do not return, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of the arhats, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of the pratyekabuddhas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. Great nāgas, by the truth and the blessing of all the Tathāgatas, let rain fall abundantly here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the truth of all the gods, pacify all harm. Svāhā. By the truth of all the nāgas, let rain fall abundantly here upon this great earth. Svāhā. By the truth of all the yakṣas, protect all sentient beings. Svāhā. By the truth of all the gandharvas (gandharva), dispel all strife and harm among human beings. Svāhā. By the truth of all the asuras, turn back entirely all inauspicious planetary and stellar influences. Svāhā. By the truth of all the garuḍas (garuḍa), cause all nāgas to become loving, and let a great stream of rain fall here upon Jambudvīpa. Svāhā. By the truth of all the kinnaras (kinnara), pacify all wrongdoing. Svāhā. Satisfy all sentient beings. Svāhā. By the truth of all the great serpents, let a vast and wide-reaching stream of rain fall. Svāhā. Seize here and now the five obstructions to rain, perfectly and completely. Svāhā. By the truth of all human beings, protect all human beings entirely. Svāhā.

Ka ra ka ra, ki ri ki ri, ku ru ku ru. Da ra da ra, di ri di ri, du ru du ru. Na ṭa na ṭa, ni ṭi ni ṭi, nu ṭu nu ṭu.

She who moves with exceeding swiftness, she who holds the water of great clouds, she who is accompanied by clouds, she who is accompanied by great clouds, she who holds the water of great clouds, she who makes clouds clear, she who gives rise to clouds, she who is the cloud of the season, she who is the source of clouds, she who rumbles with clouds, she who abides in clouds, she who wears a crown of clouds, she who bears a garland of clouds, she who is adorned with clouds, she who is mounted upon clouds, she who has taken up her dwelling in clouds, essence of clouds —

she who has locks of cloud, she who is the light of clouds, she who is accompanied by a retinue of clouds, she who dwells within great clouds, she who holds clouds for the sake of offerings, she who accomplishes the arrival of the harvest, she who dwells in mountain ravines, the Blessed One who is the mother of nāgas, she who possesses the glory of great clouds and has a star-like complexion, she who brings cool touch, she who ranges through great tempests, she who sports with the great nāgas, the Blessed One, she who holds the six extractions of the essence of pontra, by the truth of the buddhas, may you send down rain abundantly upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

ghara ghara, ghiri ghiri, ghuru ghuru, ghirinī gharinī, ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ghuma ri.

She who has nine heads, she who bears a garland of great clouds, she who bears a garland of rolling masses, she who holds all beings with her hands, she whose garments are like clouds beyond imagining, she who ranges through all fierce poisons, she who is mounted upon an array of clouds, she who roars like thunder, she who makes sounds resound, she who rouses the assembly of nāgas, the goddess who bears a garland of great clouds — do not hold back from all the nāgas; by the blessing of the Tathāgata, cause rain to fall upon this Jambudvīpa — thus we implore you — svāhā.

yara yara, yiri yiri, yuru yuru, jara jara, jiri jiri, juru juru, jhara jhara, gutu gutu, gugutu, gaṭa gaṭa, giṭi giṭvi, hara hara, hili hili, mulu mulu, tala tala, tili tili, tulu tulu, hana hana, daha daha, paca paca, gṛhṇa gṛhṇa, mardamarda, pramarda, pravarṣa vighnan, matreyo dhyāpayati — svāhā.

buddhe buddhe, bubuddhe, subuddhe, hara pāpan, sarvasattvānān, adhiṣṭhaya puṇyam, sarvabuddhānān, dhāriṇī dhare, śubhamate, guṇāgraprapte, mahājñānoloke, śukladhārme, saṃyapratijñā, mahāyānādhyuṣite, lokajyeṣṭha bhagavati, buddhamaitreya āyuburaya sarvakṣetrāṇi, śuklośvetam, paradāre, paṇaṭaravāsini, dhudhuru, śamaśama, śāntamānase — may all hindrances to rain be completely cleared away — svāhā.

By the truth of all the Tathāgatas of the three times, with the mind of loving-kindness, with faultless authentic discipline and the mind of austerity free from defect, we perfectly and rightly urge the great nāgas.

We perfectly and rightly urge the great nāga king, lord of the resplendent maṇḍala of ocean-cloud array with his boundless retinue, the king who is like a parasol — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga kings Joyful and Near-Joyful — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Ocean — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Anavatapta, the Unheated — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Takṣaka, the Splendorous — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Water-Deva — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Elāpatra — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Guardian of the Realm — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Son of Vaśravaṇa — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Grasped-and-Held — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Son of the Earth-Guardian — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Nūtala — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Glorious Splendor — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Brave and Good — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Garland of Lightning — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Great Jewel on the Crown — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Jewel-Held on the Crown — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge the nāga king Luminous Crest-Bearer — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

We perfectly and rightly urge all nāga kings, these and all others — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

Nāge nage. Mahānāge. Ghoramānase. Nāgahṛdaya. Dhumakule. Ugraroṣe. Pracaṇḍatejo. Viṣoghre. Āśāviśe. Ahighore. Kṛṣṇapiṅgale. Canacale. Lolajihve. Mahāphanakare. Kālapāśe. Raudravāsini. Ṭuṭumave. Ghaṇaghaṇa. Śikhini. Kaṇakaṇa. Gaṇagaṇa. Mahāgaṇagaṇe. Parapara. Piripiri. Purupuru. Visphuṭane. Bhurubhuru. Mahābhoge. Maṇidhari. Phiripiri. Phurubhuru. Pharaphara. Varṣavarṣa. Jalāmbhudhare. Śambhuśambhu. Vataḍutumpe. Dhuddhuddhuddhume. Meghaprabhe. Meghavāhine. Ḍhakaḍhakaḍhakaḍhuḍhume. Ghānāghānā. Śikini. Kanakaṇa. Gaṇagaṇa. Mahānāgagane. Nirātraṇya. Vajradakāri mahānāgādhipataye. Ghumaghumaghumapayastika. Jāṅgāribhujaṅgaśame. Pikaṭasaṅkate. Ghoravisphuṭanivijṛmbhante. I summon all nāgas.

By the blessing of all buddhas, by the truth of all Tathāgatas of the three times, and by the mind of loving-kindness — let abundant rain fall upon this Jambudvīpa — svāhā.

Namas sarvabuddhebhyaḥ siddhyantu mantrapadāni svāhā.

This concludes the sixty-fourth chapter, entitled "The Maṇḍala of the Wind," from the section on Causing Rain to Fall, drawn from the noble Great Cloud Sūtra of the Great Vehicle, in one hundred thousand verses.

The ritual for one who desires to cause great rain to fall is as follows. In a clean, open, unobstructed place, a blue mat is to be spread out and a blue banner hung up. The Dharma teacher, having bathed the body, should reside near the eight-limbed observance, dress in clean blue garments, anoint himself with fine fragrant incense, eat the three white foods, and sit upon a blue seat. Facing east, he should make supplication to all Tathāgatas, then read this chapter of the Maṇḍala of the Great Cloud continuously, without interruption, day and night. Four full vases filled with blue water are to be placed out. A torma, incense, and flowers are to be arranged as fully as possible.

The Dharma teacher is then to draw the following images in the four directions using cow bile mixed with pigment. To the east, at a distance of about three cubits, he shall draw with bile the nāga king with three heads, together with his various retinues of nāga attendants. To the south, at a distance of about five cubits, he shall draw the nāga king with five heads, together with his various retinues of nāga attendants. To the west, at a distance of about seven cubits, he shall draw the nāga king with seven heads, together with his various retinues of nāga attendants. To the north, at a distance of about nine cubits, he shall draw the nāga king with nine heads, together with his various retinues of nāga attendants.

The Dharma-speaker, guarding his own body and dwelling in loving-kindness, shall place a mind of compassion close to all sentient beings, then offer prayers to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and shall share the roots of virtue with the nāgas. This is the ritual procedure.

When rain does not fall, whoever recites this chapter on the wind-maṇḍala from the great cloud sūtra — without any doubt, rain will fall within one day, or two, up to seven days. The ocean may at times depart from its season, yet this rain ritual from the scripture of the great Sage shall never be otherwise. Nevertheless, one must abide in moral discipline and good qualities, completely abandoning improper moral discipline and such things as meat and fish. One should eat milk porridge, yoghurt, milk, rice with molasses, the three sweets, and the like, while reciting. If one does so, it will be accomplished — just as the King of Sages has declared, let there be no doubt.

The noble Great Cloud Sūtra of the Great Vehicle: the sixty-fourth chapter, entitled "The Wind-Maṇḍala for Bringing Down Rain," together with its ritual procedure, is complete.

This was translated by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Śīlendrabodhi, and the great-revision translator

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The names throughout this passage are a long list of nāga kings given in Tibetan phonetic and semantic translation from Sanskrit originals. Rather than retranslating the Tibetan meanings literally into English, which would produce awkward compound phrases unrecognizable to those familiar with the Sanskrit tradition, the translation renders them as reconstructed Sanskrit proper names. Many names here are well attested in other canonical lists of nāga kings and can be matched confidently. A small number of less transparent Tibetan renderings have been reconstructed by best philological judgment from the semantic components, and minor variation from other manuscript traditions is possible. The opening phrase "Thus it was established and composed" renders a Tibetan editorial colophon formula indicating the text has been finalized. The location described, the "palace of the great maṇḍala of clouds at the essence-core of glorious precious jewels," is the distinctive dwelling place of the nāga king Nandaka and Upanandaka as described in this sūtra, the Ārya Mahāmegha, and differs from the more usual Dharma-assembly settings.  The Sanskrit reconstructions for the nāga names at the opening are based on standard back-translation from Tibetan. The name rendered Ingara-mukha follows the Tibetan ཨིང་གི་རའི་གདོང, which appears to be a transcription of a non-standard Sanskrit form; the exact Sanskrit original is uncertain. Similarly, Anapatya for སྲེད་མེད་ཀྱི་བུ is interpretive, the Tibetan literally meaning "son of Craving-free" or "son of Anāpatya," and may reflect a proper name. The aspirational passage beginning "With a body as vast as an ocean" is part of a characteristic Avataṃsaka-style vision of endless multiplication of offering-bodies; the syntax is deliberately overwhelming and the translation preserves that quality.  The passage is a sustained liturgical enumeration, part of the vast offering-cloud section of the Bhadracaryā-praṇidhāna or its extended commentary context. The four-fold formula "reverence, veneration, honor, worship" (bsṭi ṣtang, blā mar, ri mor, mchod par) is a standard honorific sequence; "veneration" and "honor" here render the terms for prostration-respect and pictorial/representational homage respectively. The final two items in the passage are syntactically incomplete as given, continuing into the next portion of the text.  The term rendered "Anavatapta" transliterates the Tibetan phonetic form of Sanskrit Anavatapta, the legendary cool lake in the Himalayas said to be the source of the great rivers; this is a standard cosmological reference retained as a proper name.

The phrase translated "like joined palms pressed together" renders the Tibetan image of clouds of incense rising from leaves in the manner of respectfully cupped hands, which carries a devotional nuance.  The term rendered "portrait" for རི་མོར་བྱའོ reflects the standard fourfold formula of veneration in this sūtra genre: to honour, to take as supreme, to depict or enshrine as an image, and to make offering. Some editions read this formula slightly differently but the sense is consistent.

The flower name ཨན་ད་རྙིལ likely corresponds to Sanskrit indranīla or a related gemstone-flower epithet; the precise botanical or jewel referent is uncertain but the context is clearly ornamental.  The passage is an extended litany of offering and homage formulae drawn from what appears to be the Gaṇḍavyūha or a related avataṃsaka-style sūtra. The fourfold refrain rendered as "may homage be rendered, may veneration be offered, may the image be honored, may worship be performed" corresponds to bsti stang du bya, bla mar bya, ri mor bya, mchod par bya — a standard Tibetan quadripartite formula of reverence. The rendering of ri mor bya as "may the image be honored" follows the sense of making a visual or depicted representation as an act of honor; some translators render it "may it be portrayed" or "may it be painted." The doctrinal and textual significance of this variation is minor but worth noting.  The passage opens mid-sentence, continuing the offering-and-homage formula from the preceding section. The phrase rendered "bodhisattvas of vast rivers" renders gang chen mtsho, literally "bodhisattvas of great rivers or vast lakes," a recurrent epithet in this text indicating bodhisattvas of oceanic magnitude. The name of the nāga king is a long descriptive title translated throughout to preserve its liturgical character.  The dhāraṇī syllables are transliterated rather than translated, as is standard. The Tibetan phonetic rendering of the Sanskrit is irregular at several points, and the reconstruction above follows the most plausible Sanskrit readings while acknowledging that the underlying Sanskrit exemplar cannot be established with certainty from the Tibetan phonetics alone.

The phrase rendered "born of the family of clouds" and related epithets in the invocation section contain layered compounds that interweave cloud, nāga, and Tathāgata imagery characteristic of this genre; the translation keeps the imagery intact rather than over-interpreting it.  The phrase rendered as "covering the heights" translates a compound meaning something like "covering over the upper reaches" or "overarching the heights," which functions adverbially within a longer epithetic name; the full name is a single elaborate compound describing drum-sound pervading the ten directions. The rendering keeps this readable for narration while preserving the components.

The name rendered "the One Who Proclaimed upon Beholding the Sky Like a Great Cloud" could alternatively be read as "the One Proclaimed in the Sky Seen Like a Great Cloud"; the syntax is slightly ambiguous but the former reading is more natural.  The epithet "the Six Flavors" for the great rain-cloud refers to the traditional Indian enumeration of six tastes and is a standard cosmological and Āgamic formula here applied to nāga-rain clouds; no doctrinal difficulty arises.

The phrase rendered "five obstacles to rain" translates a list attributed to the Blessed One within the text itself; the specific five are not enumerated here but are presumably known from the broader sūtra context.  The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan. Several Sanskrit reconstructions are approximate, as is standard for dhāraṇī syllables transmitted through Tibetan phonetic transcription. The phrase rendered "the five obstacles that prevent rain" refers to a standard set of impediments to rainfall in this genre of rain-making dhāraṇī literature. The phrase "Vajradhara" renders Tibetan rdo rje 'chang, the form of the Buddha associated with tantra; this is its first occurrence and is used plainly. The passage "proclaimed by Vajrapāṇi" renders a causative reading of the final phrase, indicating that the following mantra series is assigned by Vajrapāṇi, which is a common literary device in dhāraṇī texts of this type.  The passage invokes the four stages of the śrāvaka path in sequence: stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner, and arhat. This is a standard Abhidharma enumeration and its appearance here as a series of truth-invocations is deliberate and doctrinally precise.

The phrase rendered "five obstructions to rain" refers to a set of conditions or agencies believed to obstruct rainfall. The exact enumeration is not spelled out in the passage itself; this is a technical rain-ritual concept attested in related texts.

The closing sequence of cloud-epithets appears to be a list of names or epithets of cloud-goddesses or rain-deities, likely corresponding to Sanskrit originals now lost or awaiting identification in parallel sources. They are rendered descriptively from the Tibetan as given.  The extended Sanskrit dhāraṇī syllables throughout this passage are transliterated phonetically from the Tibetan script rendering of Sanskrit; the Sanskrit is sometimes corrupt or obscure. The phrase rendered "pontra essence" involves a term of uncertain identification, possibly a plant or ritual substance. Several nāga king names are rendered by their Tibetan equivalents where no standard Sanskrit form is clearly recoverable: "Joyful and Near-Joyful" renders Nanda and Upananda; "Ocean" renders Sāgara; "Unheated" renders Anavatapta; "Splendorous" renders Takṣaka by approximation from གཟི་ཅན; "Water-Deva" renders Varuṇa or a similar figure; "Elāpatra" is the standard identification for འཇོག་པོ; "Guardian of the Realm" renders Dhṛtarāṣṭra; "Son of Vaśravaṇa" renders ནོར་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བུ as a son of Kubera/Vaiśravaṇa. The mahāyāna Sanskrit passage in the latter portion of the mantra section is heavily corrupt as transmitted through Tibetan phonetic rendering and no fully reliable Sanskrit reconstruction is possible.  The chapter number in the colophon reads sixty-fourth in the Tibetan, whereas the preceding passage's colophon implies the sequence may differ in other recensions; this is noted in case cross-referencing is needed.

The mantra section is rendered as a phonetic transcription of the Sanskrit syllables as they appear in the Tibetan transliteration. Several syllables show internal variation between the two near-identical mantra passages in this text, which is typical of ritual repetition with slight scribal variation; the transcription follows the Tibetan faithfully without normalizing.

The phrase rendered "three white foods" refers to the traditional trio of milk, yogurt, and butter, a standard ritual dietary prescription in Indo-Tibetan Buddhist ceremonial contexts.  The text ends mid-sentence with "the great-revision translator," as the colophon is cut off at that point. The Tibetan likewise breaks off, so no translator name is given in this passage. This is noted for completeness, not as an error in translation.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
