The Great Sūtra of Entering the Noble City of Vaiśālī (Ārya Vaiśālī Praveśa Mahāsūtra)

Toh 312 in the Kangyur is a large sūtra known in English as The Great Sūtra of Entering the Noble City of Vaiśālī, in Sanskrit as the Ārya Vaiśālī Praveśa Mahāsūtra, and in Tibetan as Phags pa yangs pa'i grong khyer du 'jug pa'i mdo chen po. It belongs to the general class of Mahāyāna sūtras and recounts teachings given by the Buddha as he journeyed to and dwelt in the celebrated city of Vaiśālī, a place of great significance in early Buddhist history, arriving at the mango grove of Ambapālī in the company of his attendant Ānanda. The text opens with the Buddha setting out from a resting place among the reeds of a marsh, suggesting a narrative connected to the final period of his life and perhaps to events associated with his last testament. As part of the Kangyur, it preserves canonical teachings attributed directly to the Buddha and transmitted through the traditional formula of dependent witnessing.

This completes the last testament of the Blessed One.

The Great Sūtra of Entering the Noble City of Vaiśālī.

In the language of India: Ārya Vaiśālī Praveśa Mahāsūtra. In the Tibetan language: The Great Sūtra of Entering the Noble City of Vaiśālī.

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Thus did I hear. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling in a resting place established among the reeds of a marsh. Then the Blessed One declared to the venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, let us go to that place — to the city of Vaiśālī." "Blessed One, so be it," replied the venerable Ānanda, and he listened accordingly to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One traveled through the land of Vṛji and arrived at the city of Vaiśālī, where he dwelt in the mango grove of Ambapālī.

Then the Blessed One declared to the venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, go into the city of Vaiśālī, and when you have arrived, place your foot upon the threshold of the gate and recite these dhāraṇī foundations and these verses:

Bisarata, bisarata, bisarata, bisarata. Declared by the buddha who bears compassion for the world.

Contemplated by all buddhas. Contemplated by pratyekabuddhas. Contemplated by all arhats. Contemplated by all those in training. Contemplated by all śrāvakas. Contemplated by all who are endowed with words of truth. Contemplated by the Dharma. Contemplated by Brahmā. Contemplated by each individual Brahmā. Contemplated by the lord of desire. Contemplated by Indra. Contemplated by the gods. Contemplated by the lord of the asuras. Contemplated by all the asuras. Contemplated by the emissary of the asuras. Contemplated by all spirits.

Bisarata, bisarata, bisarata, bisarata. Declared by the buddha who bears compassion for the world.

Muñcata, muñcata — desist! May the plague disease be fully pacified.

Nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata. The buddha, the Great God (Śiva) of great gods, the god above all gods, the teacher of gods — the Tathāgata has come. The gods together with Indra have come. The gods together with Brahmā have come. Those together with Prajāpati have come. The four guardians of the world have come. Many hundreds of thousands of gods have come. The lords of the asuras have come. Many hundreds of thousands of asuras have come. Many hundreds of thousands of spirits who have faith in the Blessed One have also come, for the sake of all sentient beings — and they will cause great harm to you.

Nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata, nirgacchata. Depart swiftly! Those among you who bear a mind of aversion — may they be destroyed. Those who bear a mind of loving-kindness, who do not wish harm, and who wish to take up the role of protectors — let them remain. Let them also enter into the body.

Declared by the buddha who bears compassion for the world.

Sumu, sumu, sumu, sumu, sumu, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, sumuru, muru, muru, muru, muru, muru, muru, muru, muru, miri, miri, miri, miri, miri, miri, miri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murumiri, murūrīti, ririririri ri, rīrīrīrīrīrīti, mirimirimirimiriti, hisimiri.

miri ti, miri si, sī sī sī, kaṅkarā, karakata, kaṅkarā, karakaca, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkarā, kaṅkaroti ti, kuriśo, kaṅkara kaṅkariśi, ri ri ri ri ri ri, hiriта phu svā, ripu, ripu, ripu, ripu, ripu, ripu, ripu, ripu, nāthā, nānā, thāthā, ripu ripu, nāthā thā, niragacchata, niragacchata, ripu, ripu, niragacchata, palāyāta, ripū ripū, palāyāta.

Declared by the buddha who bears compassion for the world, who holds supreme regard for the welfare of all sentient beings, who abides in loving-kindness, who possesses compassion, who abides in joy, who abides in equanimity. Kṣipram niragacchata svāhā.

By the supreme wisdom of the buddhas, and by the very nature of reality, these root mantras spoken to all gods and all spirits are hereby accomplished. These verses are hereby accomplished.

He who has utterly conquered the faults of miserliness and attachment, who renders all defilements powerless, whose mind is peaceful and who harbors no harm — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He who is the guide leading all beings onto the path of liberation, and who teaches all phenomena — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

The Teacher, the support of wandering beings, who for the sake of all sentient beings possesses bliss — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He who is the protector who, through loving-kindness, always nurtures all these beings of his heart as though they were his only child — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He who, while wandering in saṃsāra, became the support of all sentient beings, and became their island and their ally — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He for whom all phenomena have become directly manifest, who is pure and harbors no deception, and whose speech is utterly pure and unsullied — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He through whose birth as a great hero all the aims of excellence were fulfilled, and purpose and accumulation alike were accomplished — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He through whose birth the realms trembled mightily together with their forests, and all sentient beings rejoiced greatly — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He at whose seat of awakening the six pure grounds shook, and through whom Māra's mind was made ill at ease — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He through whose turning of the wheel of Dharma the noble truths were proclaimed, and from whom arose the sweet renown of the Sage — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

He whose presence captivates all non-Buddhists (tīrthikas), who vanquishes them all by the Dharma, and who brings all assemblies under his sway — may he bring you well-being and happiness.

May the buddhas bring you well-being and happiness. May Śakra (Indra) together with the gods bring well-being, and may all spirits always grant you well-being and happiness.

By the power of the merit of the buddhas, and through the intention of the gods, may whatever aim you seek be accomplished this very day.

May you who have two feet be well and happy. May you who have four feet be well and happy. May you travel your paths in well-being and happiness. May those who return also be well and happy. By day, well-being and happiness; by night, well-being and happiness; and at the midpoint of the sun's course, well-being and happiness as well. May all of you always be well and happy. May none of you come to wrongdoing.

May the buddhas and the thousand gods, surrounding you and setting forth, drive away those who harbor hostile minds and establish in their place those whose very nature is compassion.

By the words of truth of the buddhas, pratyekabuddhas, arhats, and those still in training, may those who do harm to the world be caused to depart from this city.

May all sentient beings and all living creatures, all spirits and all of you, possess only happiness. May all be free from illness.

May all behold the good, and may none fall into wrongdoing.

Whatever spirits have gathered here, those dwelling on the earth and in the sky — may they always show loving-kindness toward all living creatures, and may they practise the Dharma by day and by night.

Having declared this, the Venerable Ānanda replied to that elder, "So be it, Reverend One," and, heeding the Blessed One, set out for the city of Vaiśālī. Standing upon the threshold of the gate, he spoke the root mantras (dhāraṇī) and also these verses:

Visārata. Visārata. Visārata. Visārata. Thus it is declared by the Buddha, who bears compassion for the world.

The intention of all buddhas, the thought of all pratyekabuddhas, the thought of all arhats, the thought of all those still in training, the thought of all śrāvakas, the thought of all who are endowed with words of truth, the thought of all phenomena, the thought of Brahmā, the thought of each individual Brahmā, the thought of the Lord of Desires, the thought of Indra, the thought of the gods, the thought of the lord of the asuras, the thought of all asuras, the thought of the emissaries of the asuras, the thought of all spirits —

Visārata. Visārata. Visārata. Visārata. Thus it is declared by the Buddha, who bears compassion for the world.

Muñcata. Muñcata. May the diseases of plague be pacified.

Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Thus it is declared by the Buddha, the Great God among gods (Śiva) and the god above gods, the teacher of gods. May there come the gods together with Indra, the gods together with Brahmā, those together with the lord of sovereigns, those together with the Lord of Creatures, and the four guardians of the world. May the many thousands of gods come, and the lords of the asuras, and the many thousands of asuras. May the many hundreds of thousands of spirits who are devoted to the Blessed One come for the sake of all sentient beings — for these will cause great harm to you.

Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Depart swiftly! Those among you who harbour minds of hatred — may they be destroyed. Those who bear minds of loving-kindness, who do not desire harm, and who wish to take up the role of protectors — let them remain. Let them enter into the bodies as well.

Thus it is declared by the Buddha, who bears compassion for the world:

Sumu. Sumu. Sumu. Sumu. Sumu. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Sumuru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Muru. Miri. Miri. Miri. Miri. Miri. Miri. Miri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumiri. Murumuriti. Ririririri ri. Rīrīrīrīrīrīti. Mirimiri. Mirimiṛīti. Hisimirimiṛiti. Mirisi. Sīsimi. Kaṅkarā. Karakata. Kaṅrakara. Karakaca. Kaṅkara. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkarōtīti. Kuriśo. Kaṅkarā. Kaṅkariśi. Ririririri ri. Tiritaphusvā. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Riphu. Nāthā. Nānāthāthā. Ripū. Ripū. Nāthāthā. Nirgacchata. Nirgacchata. Ripu.

Ripu. Nirgacchata. Palāyāta. Ripū ripū. Palayātā.

May the buddhas, who are full of loving care for the world, who are endowed with supremely tender thought for the benefit of all sentient beings, who abide in loving-kindness, who are endowed with compassion, who abide in joy, who abide in equanimity — may they come forth. Kṣipram nirgacchata svāhā.

These root secret mantras, proclaimed through the supreme wisdom of the buddhas and through the nature of reality to all gods and all spirits — these are accomplished. These verses are accomplished.

He in whom greed and attachment are conquered,
who, the Victor, makes all stainless and pure,
whose mind is at peace, free from all harm —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He who is the guide, who leads all beings
onto the path of liberation,
who teaches all phenomena —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He who is the support of swift-moving teachers,
who for the sake of all sentient beings
has attained happiness and bliss —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He who is the protector, whose mind of loving-kindness
constantly nurtures all these beings of every destiny
as if each were his only child —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He who, for all sentient beings wandering in saṃsāra,
has become their refuge and support,
their island and their ally —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He to whom all phenomena appear directly,
who is pure and free from all deception,
whose speech is pure and ever purifying —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He at whose birth, the great hero,
full excellence and prosperity arose,
and every aim and every accumulation was fulfilled —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He at whose birth the realms of earth,
together with their forests, trembled greatly,
and all sentient beings rejoiced —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He at whose presence at the seat of awakening
all six realms of earth shook,
and the mind of Māra was made uneasy —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

When the wheel of Dharma was turned
and the noble truths were fully proclaimed,
and the sage's renown arose —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

He who, captivating all, defeats
every non-Buddhist adherent through the Dharma,
and brings every assembly under his sway —
may he bring well-being and good fortune to you.

May the buddhas bring well-being and good fortune to you.
May Śakra (Indra), together with the gods, bring well-being and good fortune.
May all spirits also always
bestow well-being and good fortune upon you.

By the power of the merit of the buddhas
and by the intention of the gods,
whatever aim and purpose you desire —
may that purpose be accomplished this very day.

May you who have two feet be well and fortunate.
May you who have four feet be well and fortunate.
May you who travel on the road be well and fortunate.
May those who return also be well and fortunate.
Well-being and good fortune by day, well-being and good fortune by night,
and well-being and good fortune at midday.
May you all always be well and fortunate.
May none of you come to harm.

May the buddhas and the thousand gods,
surrounding and coming forth,
drive away those with hostile minds,
and may those of compassionate nature remain.

By the words of truth of the buddhas, pratyekabuddhas,
arhats, and those still in training —
may those who do harm to the world
abandon this city.

May all sentient beings and all living creatures,
all spirits and all of you,
be endowed with happiness alone.
May all be free from illness.
May all behold what is good.
May none come to any harm.

Whatever spirits have gathered here,
and those who dwell on the earth and in the sky —
may all these beings...

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The passage opens with what appears to be the closing colophon of a preceding text before launching into the sūtra proper. The phrase rendered "last testament" translates ཞལ་ཆེམས, which literally means "testament from the mouth," a standard term for the final words or testament of a great master; here it refers to the Blessed One's last instructions.

The epithet "Great God of great gods, the god above all gods" applied to the buddha is a deliberate Buddhist appropriation and supersession of Śiva's titles; the Tibetan ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྷའི་ཡང་ལྷ literally means "the Great God, the god even above the gods." This should be understood as a polemical formula asserting the buddha's supremacy over all divine beings, not as an identification of the buddha with Śiva.

The passage containing muñcata and nirgacchata preserves Sanskrit imperative forms transliterated into Tibetan: muñcata means "release" or "let go," here rendered "desist"; nirgacchata means "go forth" or "depart." These are standard elements of epidemic-averting dhāraṇī literature, addressed to disease-causing spirits.

The section beginning with sumu through hisimiri is pure dhāraṇī syllabary and is untranslatable by design; these syllables are reproduced phonetically as they appear in the Tibetan transliteration.  The passage is a dhāraṇī text and contains extended mantra syllables in the opening section. These are transliterated rather than translated, as is standard for such material. The Tibetan spellings have been rendered into their closest Sanskrit phonetic equivalents following the conventions established in the preceding passage.

The phrase rendered "seat of awakening" in the verse about the six grounds shaking translates the implied reference to the Vajrāsana at Bodh Gayā; the Tibetan here reads simply "at the seat of awakening" (byang chub snying por), which is the standard designation.  The passage contains an unusual phrase rendered as "the Buddha, the Great God among gods and the god above gods, the teacher of gods." The Tibetan reads "sangs rgyas lha chen po lha'i yang lha / lha'i bla ma," which is a standard Buddhist epithet sequence praising the Buddha as supreme over all divine beings, including Mahādeva (Śiva). Here "lha chen po" functions as a superlative title applied to the Buddha himself, not as a reference to Śiva as a separate deity; the gloss "(Śiva)" has therefore been omitted in this instance to avoid misidentifying the Buddha with Śiva. The sequence means "the Buddha, the great god, the god even above gods, the teacher of gods," a well-attested Indic honorific formula.

The mantra syllables throughout this passage are transliterated directly from the Tibetan phonetic rendering. The underlying Sanskrit forms of many syllables, particularly in the long dhāraṇī sequence, are uncertain or corrupt in the transmitted Tibetan text, and no attempt has been made to normalize them beyond faithful phonetic rendering.  The text breaks off mid-sentence at the final verse, as the passage ends partway through. This is a textual boundary, not a translation lacuna.

The phrase rendered "swift-moving teachers" for སྟོན་པ་རྒྱུག་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྟེན is somewhat unusual; རྒྱུག་པ could mean "running" in the sense of those who actively travel to teach, or possibly refers to a class of teacher-figures. The sense of "support and basis for teachers who go forth" is preserved in the rendering.

The stanza about "the great hero" whose birth brings prosperity connects to traditional accounts of the Buddha's birth and the accompanying cosmic events, as does the stanza about the shaking of the earth at the seat of awakening.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
