The Tantra Called the Union of the Four Yoginīs (Caturyoginīsaṃpuṭatantra)

The Union of the Four Yoginīs, known in Sanskrit as the Caturyoginīsaṃpuṭatantra and in Tibetan as Naljorma Zhiyi Khasbyorgy Gyud, is a tantric scripture belonging to the class of Yoginī or Mother Tantras within Tibetan Buddhist esotericism. The text concerns the symbolic and meditative union of four yoginīs associated with the four directional faces, the five elements, and the interplay of vowels and consonants, presenting these as keys concealed throughout the tantras and here set forth in systematic exposition. It opens with homage to the glorious Vajrapāṇi and proceeds in verse, unfolding doctrinal content related to subtle-body geography, including the navel center, the principles of moon and sun, and sensory and elemental correspondences. This text is Toh 376 in the Kangyur, catalogued among the tantric scriptures of that collection.

In the language of India: the Caturyoginīsaṃpuṭatantra. In the Tibetan language: The Tantra Called the Union of the Four Yoginīs. Homage to the glorious Vajrapāṇi.

Now, that which is to be correctly explained:
The union of the four yoginīs —
explained in full as "the four faces" —
is hidden throughout all the tantras.
The faces, moreover, are the yoginīs of union.
Here they are set forth at length:
below and above, each explained in turn,
and likewise left and right.

By means of the distinctions of vowels and consonants (Skt. ālikāli),
they abide perfectly at the center of the navel,
and are explained as moon and sun.

Earth and wind in their essential nature,
water, fire, and likewise space —
the five elements, fully present.
Form, touch, and likewise sound;
the two eyes, and likewise the nose;
above and below throughout the body, clearly manifest.
They always abide as the vajra-holder.
As fraction and non-fraction, they are perfectly liberated.
From the radiance of emptiness they truly abide.
The syllable family of Ya is perfectly complete.
The syllable U, together with its bindu,
becomes adhesive and luminous.

The mode of union of the yoga —
just as the vajra-holder is intoxicated by wine,
having revolved, the mind is perfectly liberated.
The three realms in their entirety,
without remainder, come to be seen
with the vajra eye.
By the accomplishments (Skt. siddhi) of the sovereign of the seven,
all without remainder, leaving nothing out, are seen.

Brahmā (Skt. brahmā), Viṣṇu (Skt. viṣṇu), the powerful one (Śiva),
and Indra, and likewise the lord of desire —
having subdued them by the force of the other,
the lord of yoga makes offering.
By the gods headed by Brahmā,
it is explained with the word of the sacred commitment (Skt. samaya):
"Life and all effort are to be made."
By that, this is the vow of sacred commitment.

To that, the modes of union are explained.
Perfectly abiding in the four faces,
they are called the assembly of the four yoginīs,
fully endowed with the four engagements.
Whatever arises through the path of the sense faculties,
that very intrinsic nature thereof —
enjoying from all that is desired —
becomes the intrinsic nature of all buddhas.

As form is perfected, just so,
what is meditation upon it like?
How are mantras to be generated?
And how does completion come about?
All of these are mere conventional expressions.
From mantras and tantras, they rightly arise.
The awakening mind (bodhicitta) is here extolled,
fully endowed with the five desirables.
The object is indicated by its defining characteristic;
yet what is to be indicated must not be indicated as manifold.

After setting forth the mantras at length,
listen to the meditation upon the deities.
The upper gate is threefold.
At the navel, the one who has the form of wind —
therein, at the center, perpetually empty,
like pure crystal:
great enjoyment will certainly arise.

With nine and ten possessed —
by its eight-part limbs,
it is the seed of the nine gates.
The seeds are recited throughout the body.

Being itself the nature of the wisdom ḍākinī,
the upper portion is wisdom,
and arises together with the vajra-holder.
It is explained as the mind-vajra.
Here, the upper portion is explained as the lotus (padma).
The place in it is explained as the bhaga.
That very wisdom, together with the vajra-holder,
arising through the support and the supported,
abides perfectly throughout all the channels.
Having become the form of the vital essence (Skt. śukra),
it acts as expansion and contraction.

By means of the yoga of the generation stage (Skt. utpattikrama),
by engaging the completion stage (Skt. sampannakrama) —
by means of the yoga of the sequence of instructions,
the deities are described as meditated upon.
All of these, through the various yogas,
are explained as moon and sun.

Other and yet not other, perfectly liberated —
the form of the buddha is unmoving.
That is to be held as the object of apprehension.
Whoever abides there, in that way —
by day it is spoken of as the Blessed Vajra-Holder,
by night it is spoken of as wisdom.
Gone into the sky, supremely peaceful,
pure and virtuous, delightful.

All tīrthikas, buddhas included,
asuras, yakṣas, and rākṣasas —
that very one: both with attachment and free of attachment,
and that very one: liberated from desire.
That very one is attached to women,
that very one takes birth in a womb,
that very one dies and is the abode of the rounded.

That very one is seen by drying out.
That very one has become what is above.
That very one abides perfectly in fragrance.
That very one is the knower of suffering,
and through that knowing, in bliss itself,
that very one alone pervades.

With a form like drops of nectar —
the supreme one endowed with beautiful form,
the various forms that are pleasing to the mind,
the splendor that illuminates all forms,
bearing without exception every reflection.

A half of a half of sixteen, and half of that —
ever the knower of suchness,
the form that is ever peaceful in its variety,
perfectly endowed with the five spaces of the sky:
that very one is said to have entered supremely.

Like a lamp that is luminous to beings,
it arises perfectly at the tip of the nose,
a ray of light from a blazing garland —
all of these I have declared
as the defining marks of support and supported.
Whoever knows through understanding performs the rite,
and that one's splendor is abundantly accomplished.

Furthermore, the assembled mantras are set forth —
the secret union, concealed,
not to be grasped at the end of the eight groups.
Perfectly endowed with the five seeds,
therefore the syllable bhu is to be given.
First, perfectly endowed with the syllable om,
the syllable a is the supreme of all syllables.
The great bindu is without syllable.
Abiding in the midst of space within space,
mantra and tantra arise perfectly.
Just as it is, so too the mantra,
in the manner of suchness,
perfectly endowed with syllable alone —
in that, it is supremely renowned as the center.

Buddhas and bodhisattvas,
and whatever other divine assemblies there may be,
all spirits without exception,
gods and the secret ones among the demigods —
in the center of that, they are perfectly complete.

By what has form — beginning with syllables —
and by the distinction of the yoginī with form and the lāmā,
and by the distinction of the Dūmskyes-mā,
it is explained as "the four faces."
Perfectly endowed with the four yogas,
endowed with a navel and with a stamen,
perfectly endowed with four petals —
in the center of that is the great hero,
adorned perfectly with eight arms.

The first is filled with flesh,
the second is filled with blood,
the third and fourth are the body-mudrā,
the khaṭvāṅga and the ḍamaru.
Likewise, white rays stream forth,
like the sky of autumn, unstained.
The white face, the red face, the black likewise,
and the green face: they are fierce.

The eight mudrās are explained in the sūtra.
The hand is renowned as a shower of weapons.
The first is the mudrā of entry.
The second is the one who draws out the heart.
The third is the mudrā that bewilders.
The fourth likewise causes falling.
The fifth is the mudrā of the dancing lady.
The sixth is declared to be the lady who kills.
The seventh is the mudrā of the devouring lady.
The eighth is certain to take from above.

The lady of death and the one who terrifies,
the fierce one and the one who eats excellently,
Bhasumā and desire itself —
these very eight are themselves the sow.
The form that transforms beyond endurance,
the lady who eats blood and semen,
blazing with rays of various flames —
the vajra ḍākinī is to be meditated upon.
Wisdom, extensively explained in many ways,
arises perfectly in the center of that.

In an expanse of a hundred thousand leagues,
it is illuminated by her.
Sentient beings have no beginning and no end.
Vajrasattva, full of great desire —
the bindu becomes vajra-natured,
clear like a half-moon.
The throne is of padmarāga.
The form of the king is luminous,
explained as kingship itself,
renowned as arising above.

Again, it is to be set forth,
spoken of through the distinction of families.
In the east it becomes Vajrasattva.
In the south Vairocana is proclaimed.
In the west is the king of horses.
In the north is Padma, lord of dance.
In the center of the wheel is Heruka.
The sound above is horse-faced.
These are said to be set forth here,
five aspects through the distinction of families —
there they are to be meditated upon.
Indestructible, beyond dissolution,
perfectly complete in the center of that.
The protector Vairocana and the rest —

This is the Great Tantra Called the Tantra Bound by the Gaṇacakra Arising from the Union of the Four Yoginīs — the First Inquiry.

Then Vajravārāhī,
adorned with ankle-ornaments and a necklace,
performs the dance within that maṇḍala
and bestows empowerment.

For the proper establishment of the sacred bond,
the Sow thus, vajra-bearer —
the vajra-bearer as you wish —
great fragrance, fragrant water to consume,
blood and semen, and likewise flesh,
ever the woman with vigor,
or making milk-offering in the lotus of the bhaga —
speak, O vajra-bearer of great bliss!

Then the Blessed One, the vajra-bearer,
having laughed, spoke these words:
O goddess, why would I not rejoice?
I eat blood, semen, and so forth.
I always pay reverence to women.
I make milk-offering in the lotus of the bhaga.

Again: Excellent! Excellent! Bestowed!
The guardian of the gate, likewise the vajra-bearer,
having taken up a skull in the proper manner,
offers food to the vajra-bearer.
Sitting still and naked,
the vajra-bearer with hair unbound
confers empowerment excellently
and makes milk-offering in the bhaga, O vajra-bearer.

From that point on, O Vajra,
the excellent conduct for the sake of sentient beings:
the food is great fragrance, fragrant water,
blood and semen, and flesh.
One is to make milk-offering in the lotus of the bhaga
and accomplish the nectars.

By the vajra-yoga messenger-woman,
empowerment is then always conferred.
Hūṃ hūṃ haḥ haḥ aḥ aḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ svāhā!

Then, immediately and all at once,
the vajra-ḍākinīs themselves
proclaimed aloud with a great cry:
The vajra-bearer is empowered!

Endowed with varied forms and greatly fierce,
they are perfectly seated upon thrones of skulls,
drinking flesh and blood,
engaging in the secret maṇḍala.
Some strike the musical instruments —
the paṭaha drum, the mukundā, and others —
some sing with full voice,
some play the vīṇā,
some perform the dance of the vajra-bearer,
some sound the tinkling of bells,
some proclaim various sounds,
and in all ten directions the sounds of pheṃ ring out.
Some perform various dances,
some sing within the maṇḍala,
some scatter flowers.
Thus they confer empowerment upon the vajra-bearer.
Some make abundant offerings of incense,
some likewise of perfume.
With such offering as this,
one is to act within the secret maṇḍala.

Then that goddess, the vajra-bearer,
spoke these very words:
Having clearly set forth the gaṇacakra maṇḍala itself
and the empowerments,
I will explain still further —
the supreme placements of the deities.

The enclosure is eight cubits on each side,
quadrilateral, with four gates.
The mantra-practitioner should examine twice that measure.
Wherever the host of ḍākinīs roams freely
and space is pervaded by light —
that is the supreme maṇḍala.

In the center, draw a wheel complete:
the hub adorned with stamens,
perfectly combined with four petals,
endowed with the color white.
In its center place the hero.
He is pure, stainless as crystal.
The foremost face smiles fully.
The foremost eyes gaze openly.
The brows are knit, vividly furrowed.
The teeth are bared, inspiring terror —
the faces turned to gaze toward the south.
The left side is wondrous.
The back is of great terror.
The front and back are adorned with horse-faces.
White, red, and likewise black,
green — those are the colors.
Eight arms also are to be drawn.
He is adorned with a garland of skulls.
The glorious bearer of a garland of heads —
his terrifying tongue is lolling,
like the fire at the great end of an age,
fearsome as a charnel ground.
Heaped up, wild, and greatly laughing,
he sounds the cry of pheṃ.

One face and two arms:
the four deities are to be described.
A khaṭvāṅga staff and a skull-cup in hand —

they drink blood and semen.

The second wheel is now precisely described.
On a round lunar maṇḍala disc
stands the great wheel with eight syllables —
blazing red rays of light.
Rūpiṇī and Āvahinī,
Mārgaśrī and Samālī,
Aparāvartā and Āhikī —
these eight are said to be vajra-bearing.
These eight goddesses are to be placed here.
Brilliantly blazing white in color,
each holds a khaṭvāṅga staff in hand
and a skull-cup filled with blood.

Now the outer wheel is precisely described:
the arrangement of deities for offering.
Saṃkhinī and Pukkasī,
Ghātinī the White and Śroṇī,
and Caṇḍī and Śavarikā herself,
and Tārā likewise, and Bhrukuṭī,
Trailokyavijayā and Mahābalā,
and likewise Ghasmarī,
and Durgā and Cāmuṇḍā,
and likewise Brahmāṇī and Vaiṣṇavī —
the gatekeepers, as precisely described,
are to be placed at the four gates.

The great wheel is blue in color,
its radiance the light of a blazing garland.
The great goddess is white in color,
holding a khaṭvāṅga staff and a fish-tail sword.

This maṇḍala is the king of maṇḍalas.
The vows of the four yoginīs
are common to one's own stream of being.
The maṇḍala is the guru of gurus.
The vow of the great churning —
that, it is said, is its guru.

This concludes the second chapter, the Examination of the Maṇḍala, from the Union of the Four Yoginīs.


Now further there is to be explained
the sādhana of the great samaya.
From elephant, horse, donkey,
and cow, and from the lamp of the dog —
the great lamp arises.
It illuminates with the joy of beings.
Crow, owl, hawk,
heron, and vulture — these five:
the great incense is precisely described,
and it is offered as incense.
These will bring all under one's power.
One moves through the three earths.
As long as the assembly of the practice is gathered,
this is supreme among all that performs all attainments.

The five nectars (amṛta) are now enumerated —
the deathless, without substantiality.
They are to be consumed without conceptual thought,
for the wise one, because of the absence of inherent nature.

The mantra drawn from the final section,
complete in sixteen parts,
is joined above with praṇava,
pressed down and adorned with a bindu.
It is to be called throughout as fragrance.
From all sides the maṇḍala wheel of the mind —
below, the twenty-seventh is given.
It is opened by mantra and so forth.
It is rightly applied to the crown of the head.
With the syllable in the divine form
of twenty-six it is further applied,
adorned with two vowel-letters.
Twenty-three are likewise to be taken
and applied below as the lower part,
complete with the third vowel.
With the fourth it is to be joined.
In its center, it is precisely stated,
it is adorned with the sovereign syllable.
The sixteen at the boundary, as precisely described,
pervade above and below.
At its center, as precisely stated,
is the syllable of great emptiness —
Vajrasattva, indestructible,
pure as crystal.
These substances are to be consumed.

These yogas are supreme —
they are exalted above all yogas.
To you they have been explained in sūtra form.
The edible substances are now precisely described.
Through whoever's proper reasoning all is eaten:
having mixed all things with equal taste,
without distinguishing pure from impure,
in accordance with suchness (tathatā), one eats
all things along with all edibles.

Through the precise ten-fold division of suchness,
the apprehended and apprehender are fully liberated.
The essence of generosity is to be given.
Having completed the yoga with mind,
one releases everything like grass and so forth —
this has become the discipline of the buddhas.
Through this very suchness all are without fear,
and no being whatsoever is harmed.

First, unsurpassed compassion.
Patience and discipline without obstruction,
and the warding off of harm to others —
curtains and pins and nets —

The fierce māra is conquered,
and where there is no māra, there is no death.
One's own mind is to be bound —
for whoever tames their own mind,
what need is there to speak of harm from māra?

With the fragrance of the mind of equanimity,
one draws the four-sided figure perfectly.
When one abides in equanimity of mind
with camphor and sandalwood upon the body,
the wisdom of equanimity itself is declared.

The selflessness of phenomena is blended in —
whoever does this becomes victorious in yoga.
The foods taken from the requests
of the yoginīs
conquer old age and sickness entirely
throughout the whole surface of the earth.

This concludes the third examination, entitled The Five Nectars of the Great Pledge, from the Union of the Four Yoginīs.

Now, what is to be properly explained
is the sādhana of the first engagement.
The engagement is to be understood as fourfold.
The four pledges are to be accomplished.
The first is to know the seminal essences.
The second is likewise blood itself.
Vajra water and great fragrance —
these are the four pledges to be relied upon.
Attachment is explained as the seminal essence.
Envy is blood itself.
Delusion is Vairocana, the king.
Aversion is combined with the fragrant water.

Through the yoga of the four pledges,
the practitioner who engages in the four pledges
will accomplish the first engagement
and become equal to Vajrasattva.

Through the yoga of installing a painted image,
that very pledge is to be accomplished.
The empty vajra is to be proclaimed,
the wisdom being is to be visualized.
In brief, mantra is to be recited —
the mantras of HŪṂ are to be uttered.
One meditates by means of material substances.
This is the expansion and the gathering in.

Victorious over the four māras,
one binds them with these armors and weapons.
With fences, pegs, tents, and the like,
one binds the four directions and so forth.
It arises perfectly from the four elements,
and the four māras are fully enumerated.
Phlegm, flesh, feet,
and the element of bone — it arises perfectly from these.
Locana, Māmakī, Tārā,
and White-robed — these are the fourth.

The four elements, being pure,
are declared in the first engagement.

What is explained as the great diligence:
wind and fire are supreme,
and in the middle of that one abides perfectly.
The name of the nature of Jātarī —
varied in shape and color,
renowned as beyond color.
In the manner of vowels and letters,
without vowel and without letter.

Not Brahmā, not Viṣṇu, not the Fierce One,
not space and not desire,
not the moon and not the stars,
not the sun and not the wind,
not a yakṣa, not a rākṣasa, not an asura,
not a spirit, not a hungry ghost —
throughout the varied vessels and their contents,
throughout the entirety of the three realms,
the Great Self pervades all.
Inert matter itself is understood through mind.
That very suchness becomes worldly:
Brahmā, Viṣṇu, the great Maheśvara (Śiva),
the moon, Rāhu, the stars, and the gods —
that very suchness is the great bliss of all.
Vajradhara, Vairocana,
Padma, the Sun, the Blood-Drinker, the Horse,
the Vajra Yoginī, the Messenger —
that very suchness is the great bliss of vajra.
Vajra, and Vajradhara itself.
Likewise Padma, and the Holder of the Lotus.
Jewel, and the Holder of the Jewel —
it is transformed into these families.
That very suchness is the drawing of the maṇḍala,
the five colors of colored powder.
That very suchness is to be made into mantra —
it is the syllables HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ.

Through minds become deluded,
beings of the hells, animals, hungry ghosts,
gods, humans, and asuras
revolve and wander in this saṃsāra.

The great yoga in brief
abides in the Vajra-holder.

The Great Goddess asks again:
How do going and coming about?
How are the minds here, from this abode,
said to take birth?
How does the seminal essence take form?
How does the birth of a person occur?
From blood, how does the birthplace of that body arise?
What is the arising of the elements?
And how does that birth take place?

How do earth, and likewise water,
fire, wind, and space itself,
and attachment to all birthplaces —
how do these things pervade in their various forms?
How does the form of the peaceful arise?
How does everything take birth?
Explain all of these correctly —
speak to me truthfully, O Goddess.

Just so — listen well, O Vajra-holder.
All the births of sentient beings,
churned completely through in saṃsāra,
shall now be turned by skillful means right here.
In the time that has no beginning and no end,
all sentient beings truly arise.
Like the ocean churned down to its depths,
great intelligence is fashioned there.
From that, those beings come to take birth.
Together with the element of earth,
churned and equalized precisely by fire,
there are the distinctions of water and wind.
The mind, clinging strongly to that place,
seizes and takes hold of the womb —
and thus it continues to revolve in saṃsāra.
Joy and sorrow together —
from these there will arise
what is called individual birth.
Just so, the profundity of these phenomena:
buddhas call it buddhahood.
These same teachings, set forth in parity,
are thirty in number and difficult to find.

This concludes the fourth chapter, entitled "The Four Parts of the Oral Instructions on Suchness from the Union of the Four Yoginīs."

Then shall the next topic be rightly explained.
Through fire offering it is to be accomplished.
Fire offering, it is taught, is of two kinds:
outer and inner, abiding as each.
How is the outer form of it described?
And how does the inner come about?
Listen, O Vajra-holder — the inner:
how the inner fire offering is truly to be accomplished.
Kindle great fires blazing high,
and perform the fire offering free from conceptuality.
Whatever food and drink there may be,
into that offer everything as fire offering.
The substances of the offering, as taught by their intrinsic nature,
are the five: the aggregate of form and the rest.
Perform the fire offering free from conceptuality —
all of these arise from mind alone.
Blood and semen, and likewise flesh,
and the five great and small fragrances —
these are to be consumed free from conceptuality.
O intelligent one, by the very absence of intrinsic nature:
delusion, pride, and likewise attachment,
aversion, and likewise desire itself,
envy, miserliness, and slander —
these, as the very samaya, are stainless.
Just as the sun blazes,
in just that way one becomes stainless.
Just as the autumn moon is clear,
so is this bright within the center.
It becomes great desire.
Like the vajra, the lamp that gives light —
this very thing is declared to be liberation,
and one attains the unsurpassed rank.
When one is established in this fire offering,
the gods are fulfilled and gladdened.

Having thoroughly expounded the fire offering,
the consecration is now to be explained.
Having first abided in the prior yoga,
one then proceeds to the consecration.
In the consecration of an image, a painted scroll, and the like,
the yogin holds the text,
with the glorious left hand holds the bell,
and with the right hand fully grasps the vajra.
For all purposes, all yogins
are to make beautiful offering to the image.
Filling it with flesh and beer,
placed properly upon a throne —
parpati, kāśaṃkuli —
make all offerings with delight.
Flowers, incense, and butter lamps,
fragrance itself, and the four kinds,
songs and melodies, and likewise dances,
and the practitioner's phat, ha, and so on —
to this image and all the rest,
great consecration is to be performed.

Ya iṃ aṃ hiṃ ya i aṃ,
ze ijja i mā a uṃ,
mā a uṃ mā adha mmu pā,
pijja i citta yaṃ mu,
ciṭṭijja ai sa e la,
satthrāṭṭhu ki ri jja i.

By receiving these songs,
all empowerments too are received.
All phenomena are completely perfected.
The foundation of all Tathāgatas,
the great cloud of all offerings —
it is said to expand and gather.

The consecration I have here explained
is difficult to find in any other tantra.

This concludes the fifth chapter, the examination of fire offering and consecration, from the Union of the Four Yoginīs.

Then, what is to be explained in brief:
the supreme means for establishing that very suchness —

The mind is always free of conceptual thought.
How could it be otherwise through conceptuality?
Just as fire blazes brilliantly,
it is said to burn wood without cease.
In that, the wood is what is burned,
and this is seen to be what burns it.
Just as that burning proceeds accordingly,
the wise one, through the absence of conceptual thought,
regards the five aggregates as the wood.

Likewise the aggregate of form itself:
bones and limbs, phlegm,
blood and semen, and great impurity,
the two eyes, and likewise the ears,
and likewise the nose itself,
earth and water and likewise fire,
wind and space itself —
all five elements in their entirety.
These twenty-five suchnesses —
their abodes, each distinctly,
I shall enumerate distinctly.

The Dharma wheel dwelling at the navel,
endowed with sixty-four petals,
is taught as the abode of wisdom.
Brilliant like the orb of the moon,
what dwells at its center
blazes forth like fire.
That great fire blazes,
and to behold its tip
is to behold form thereby.
Grasping all things as form
is said and proclaimed as the abode of mind.
The one who holds the form of the syllable HŪṂ
ever arises as Vajradhara.
It is like the form of the great Vajradhara.
Moved by the wind, it is fire,
renowned at its center.
What is taught as having the form of the moon
is wisdom itself, in brief.
Just as it is proclaimed as the sun,
it will come to include Vajradhara.

The last form of the eight divisions,
together with the bindu and the hook-syllable —
that itself is what is called the sun,
blazing with a garland of rays.
Arising perfectly at its center,
one comes to abide equally with Vajradhara.

Just as one seized by sleep
sees not the slightest thing,
yet upon waking, the grasped objects —
form and the rest — are always seen:
there, method is to be cultivated.
Its intrinsic nature is proclaimed supreme.
Sentient beings' unobstructed great bliss is spoken of.
Abiding there, with things as they are,
the Perfection of Wisdom shines forth.
Therefore, suchness itself, through things as they are,
the wise mind declares as suchness.

Mind is perfectly pure,
yet wanders through the ocean of saṃsāra.
The mantra practitioner goes where desired,
moves to abide in an instant.
Those of great desire will be bound by attachment,
the fierce are marked with fierceness,
the peaceful with peace.
This is the successive victory in front and behind.
Just as the lotus here in succession
is not soiled by the fault of attachment,
habitual tendencies of all kinds do not stick as faults.
The three realms are likewise pure,
neither empty nor non-empty —
this is the attainment of the Middle Way.

The yoga of the Perfection of Wisdom,
method is of the nature of compassion.
This is the vajra of awakening mind.
Mind and mental factors, by their intrinsic nature,
are without things — the actuality of meditation.
It is not said to be meditating upon that.
Without a rosary and without activity,
it is said to be without accumulation.
Abiding in this yoga
is the supreme level of the Middle Way.

Unsurpassed wisdom —
"unsurpassed" means without gradation.
By this, saṃsāra is completely liberated.
The supreme level of irreversibility
is called Vajrasattva.
Through that, Vajrasattva is accomplished.
In this very life it is accomplished,
and one becomes equal to Vajrasattva.

To eat blood and semen,
great impurity-water, flesh — these five:
one's life will thereby flourish
and one will become equal to Vajrasattva.

ba hū bi ha hūṃ kā ra ga ti ba hūṃ bi ha,
rū pa dhā ri ṇe ba hūṃ bi dha nā nā rañ ji ha,
ba hū bi ha bṛ tya gī ta tya,
ba hu bi ha ji ba san ta tya śe,
ṣaḥ ni śe ṣa sa tva bi na ya bi dig bhan sa ma ra stu bi śud dhe haḥ haḥ haḥ haḥ hoḥ.

a hai sambhare siddha mahūṃ a ho,
śuṃ ha hūṃ re u pa rū a la la la la hoḥ.

These songs having been taken up,
they are supreme above all tantras.
One's life will thereby flourish,
and one becomes equal to Vajrasattva.

From the union with the four yoginīs, the settlement of suchness — this is called the sixth tantra.

Then, what is to be truly explained:
suchness itself is the whole of yoga.
Generosity and moral discipline, diligence likewise,
meditative concentration, patience, and wisdom,
power, and likewise skillful means,
aspiration, and the arising of genuine gnosis —
the ten perfections in their fullness,
the vow of the bodhisattva:
generosity is taught as fourfold.
The essential nature of the three forms of moral discipline,
meditative concentration is taught as fourfold,
diligence becomes fivefold,
patience is to be known as tenfold,
wisdom becomes sixfold,
power is taught in ten excellent forms,
skillful means becomes fivefold,
aspiration is to be known as twofold,
and gnosis abides in five forms.

Dharma, fearlessness, material gifts, and loving-kindness —
these four forms of generosity
are the perfection of generosity.

Free from self-grasping and devoid of arrogance,
abiding in the non-duality of the two truths —
these three, expressed as the three forms of moral discipline,
are taught as the perfection of moral discipline.

That by which the two yoginīs
and the two outer forms are taught —
that is the perfection of meditative concentration.

Great smell-substance, smell-water, and likewise flesh,
blood and semen, arising genuinely —
these five are the fivefold diligence,
expressed by the word samaya.

Harsh speech, lies, and idle chatter,
attachment, aversion, and envy,
pride, anger, and likewise divisiveness —
these ten, when fully explained:
the Vajra-holder becomes endowed with patience.

Right view, right intention,
right speech, and right action,
right livelihood and right effort —
these I have condensed into a sūtra
and expressed as the sixfold wisdom.

The power of faith and the power of mindfulness,
the power of meditative absorption and the power of wisdom,
the power of body and the power of speech,
the power of gnosis and the power of aspiration,
and the powers of diligence —
these are the ten powers.

To generate virtue not yet arisen,
to genuinely abandon non-virtue already arisen,
to prevent non-virtue not yet arisen from arising,
and to increase virtue already arisen —
these four, in all phenomena,
are taught as the wholesome phenomena
that bring about completion.

Aspiration abides in two forms.
Mirror-like, equality, discriminating,
accomplishing action, the pure dharmadhātu —
gnosis becomes fivefold.

These fourteen in brief
are a summary of the perfections.
I have expressed this very suchness —
let the Vajra-holder hear it and settle it with certainty.

The boundary of twelve, the boundary of nine,
from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet —
in the center of that there is definite transformation,
abiding fully in the center of the navel.

Perpetually arising,
this is what the Vajra-holder sees here.

In the center of body, speech, and mind,
a blazing garland blazes.
It abides always at the upper gate,
garlanded with rays of sunlight.
Not even a little is seen outside the body.
Its form is that of a wheel of fire.

That very one, through the yogic path,
abides always in a permanent way.
For it there is no summer,
no spring, no autumn exists,
no winter, no thaw —
let the yogin meditate upon it always.

The mantra practitioner should conduct himself like a lion.
As he abides in mantra and tantra,
he should eat fish and meat;
drinking wine is the supreme beverage.
Through the ritual of extracting essence,
mantras are not to be recited.

At the place of weapons, always and at all times,
one should indicate the characteristic to be indicated.

When the Blessed One had spoken these words, the retinue of the world with its gods, humans, and asuras rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had taught.

Thus is the great king of tantras called The Union of the Four Yoginīs now complete.

From the great tantra of the Yoginī, definitively arisen from glorious Oḍḍiyāna, in twelve thousand verses — from that great king of tantras encompassing both the worldly and the transcendent — this was composed at the feet of the glorious Indrabhūti.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The text is a tantric scriptural verse of a technical and cryptic nature, following the genre conventions of Vajrayāna twilight language (sandhyābhāṣā). Several phrases resist transparent translation.

The phrase "the sovereign of the seven" and the related "accomplishments of the sovereign of the seven" likely refers to a set of seven tantric accomplishments or a deity classification standard to the tradition of this tantra, but the specific referent is not recoverable without a commentary.

The closing phrase rendered "the abode of the rounded" translates rila po'i gnas, literally "the abode of the spherical or rotund," which may be a coded reference to a particular tantric locus, body part, or realm. Without a commentarial tradition for this specific text to hand, the literal rendering is given.

The phrase "As fraction and non-fraction, they are perfectly liberated" renders cha dang cha min rnam par grol, a technical expression that may refer to divisible and indivisible aspects of the bindu or to partial and non-partial aspects of the yoginī union; the doctrinal sense is preserved as literally as possible.

"Buddhas included" in the penultimate stanza renders sangs rgyas la sogs mu stegs kun, literally "all tīrthikas headed by / including buddhas," which is grammatically unusual. The text appears to list buddha as the first in a sequence of beings said to be drawn into this tantric reality, followed by tīrthikas of all kinds, asuras, yakṣas, and rākṣasas. This is consistent with the antinomian inclusivism common in Vajrayāna mahāyoga literature.  The expression "a half of a half of sixteen, and half of that" is a numerological formula likely yielding two, referring to a specific count within the tantric system; the Tibetan is terse and the intended referent depends on context within the larger tantra cycle.

The term rendered "Dūmskyes-mā" is a transliteration of a proper name or epithet for a tantric female figure; the Tibetan "dum skyes ma" is not fully transparent and may refer to a specific ḍākinī or yoginī class. The translation preserves it as a proper name.

The phrase "the five spaces of the sky" refers to a quintuple division of space in the tantric cosmology, sometimes associated with the five buddha-families and their corresponding aspects of awareness.

The "king of horses" in the west likely refers to Hayagrīva, the horse-headed emanation, consistent with the horse-face mentioned as the sound above.

The passage is from a Mahāyoga or Yoginītantra context, and several of the eight mudrā-ladies named correspond to well-known classes of tantric wrathful goddesses; their names have been rendered by function where transparent and transliterated or descriptively rendered where not.  The terms bhaga and its compound with padma render a standard Tantric euphemism for the female sexual organ; these are left in Sanskrit as technical ritual terms, consistent with the received Tantric vocabulary.

The mantra line "Hūṃ hūṃ haḥ haḥ aḥ aḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ svāhā" preserves the Sanskrit seed-syllables as they appear in the text; they are not translated.

The figure placed in the center of the wheel whose description spans the final section is most likely Heruka, consistent with the preceding passage; the text does not name him explicitly at this point but all iconographic features accord with his standard description.  The passage contains several Sanskrit deity-names in Tibetan phonetic transcription, some of which are partially legible and others uncertain. The names Saṃkhinī, Pukkasī, Ghātinī, Śroṇī, Caṇḍī, Śavarikā, Bhrukuṭī, Trailokyavijayā, Mahābalā, Ghasmarī, Durgā, Cāmuṇḍā, Brahmāṇī, and Vaiṣṇavī are standard yoginītantra deity-names and the identification is confident. Āvahinī, Rūpiṇī, Mārgaśrī, Samālī, Aparāvartā, and Āhikī in the inner eight are less standard; the renderings follow the phonetic Tibetan closely but the Sanskrit originals may vary in different manuscript traditions.

The lengthy mantra-arrangement section describes a complex syllable-insertion ritual with numbered positions and vowel placements; the translation follows the Tibetan syntax faithfully, but the specific technical procedure cannot be fully reconstructed from the text alone without a commentary tradition.

The final line breaks off mid-sentence; this reflects the source passage as given.  The text here is a tantric scripture of the Yoginītantra class, and several passages are deliberately encoded in "twilight language" (sandhyābhāṣā), meaning that terms like "seminal essence," "blood," "fragrant water," and the fourfold pledge substances carry simultaneous outer, inner, and secret meanings. The translation renders the surface level throughout, which is standard practice for such texts.

"Jātarī" is a name or epithet that appears without full contextual explanation in this passage; it may refer to a specific tantric deity or to an epithet meaning "enemy-conqueror." Its exact referent here is uncertain.

"Rāhu" (rendered as "the eclipse-seizer" in some traditions) is here translated by its common name, as it appears in a list of celestial and divine beings.

The "Blood-Drinker" and "the Horse" in the list of transformations of suchness are likely Heruka and Hayagrīva respectively, appearing as members of the tantric deity families.  The syllables in the song passage are phonetically transcribed Sanskrit or Apabhraṃśa in the Tibetan, and their meaning is not transparent. They are rendered here in Roman transliteration as they appear, following the convention for liturgical syllables whose semantic content is not determinable from the text alone.

The term "parpati, kāśaṃkuli" in the consecration section appears to be a list of offering substances or ritual items transliterated from a non-Tibetan language, likely Sanskrit or Apabhraṃśa, and their precise identification is uncertain.

The phrase rendered "the five great and small fragrances" translates a list of five ritual substances that in tantric context typically refers to the five ambrosias, which include bodily substances; this is consistent with the surrounding discussion of inner fire offering.  The passage includes a series of verses describing an inner yoga system involving the body's cakras, elements, and subtle body. The "twenty-five suchnesses" is a technical enumeration likely referring to the twenty-five elements of the Cakrasaṃvara or related Yoginī tantra system, comprising the five aggregates, five elements, five sense faculties and their objects, and so forth. The exact correspondence depends on the specific commentarial tradition and is not unpacked in the root text here.

The phrase rendered "the last form of the eight divisions, together with the bindu and the hook-syllable" refers to a syllabic or graphemic visualization practice. "Eight divisions" likely refers to the eight limbs of a syllable in Indic script analysis; the precise technical referent is system-dependent.

The closing mantra passage is in a Sanskritized or mixed-language form that does not yield fully transparent semantic content and is therefore transliterated rather than translated.  The fourfold generosity, threefold moral discipline, fourfold meditative concentration, fivefold diligence, tenfold patience, sixfold wisdom, tenfold power, fivefold skillful means, twofold aspiration, and fivefold gnosis reflect a standard but tantric-inflected enumeration of the ten perfections with their sub-enumerations. The total of fourteen named categories is an unusual systematization not found in standard Mahāyāna pāramitā literature; this appears to be a Vajrayāna-specific reckoning.

The passage on the five substances described as "diligence" identified by the word samaya — flesh, blood, semen, smell-substance, and smell-water — refers to the five tantric samaya-substances (Skt. pañcāmṛta or related category), here mapped onto the perfection of diligence. This is a characteristic Vajrayāna reinterpretation of pāramitā categories in terms of tantric practice.

The closing colophon-like phrase "from the union with the four yoginīs, the settlement of suchness — this is called the sixth tantra" marks a chapter division.  The colophon identifies the root text as a twelve-thousand-verse Yoginī tantra originating from Oḍḍiyāna, the legendary tantric realm often identified with the Swat Valley. The phrase "worldly and transcendent" renders the standard Tibetan pair for sāṃsāric and supramundane teachings, here used as a subtitle or chapter descriptor of the larger tantra. "Composed at the feet of" is a standard honorific colophon formula indicating the work was authored or compiled under the authority of the master Indrabhūti; the sentence appears to break off, suggesting the colophon continues beyond the passage given.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
