The Glorious Concise Saṃvara, King of Tantras (Tantra-rāja-śrī-laghu-saṃvara-nāma)

The Glorious Concise Saṃvara, King of Tantras — known in Sanskrit as the Tantra-rāja-śrī-laghu-saṃvara and in Tibetan as the Rgyud kyi rgyal po dpal bde mchog nyung ngu — is a tantric scripture belonging to the tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara or Heruka cycle, one of the most important systems of Yoginī or Mother Tantra in Vajrayāna Buddhism. The text presents itself as a condensed or "concise" version of the Saṃvara teachings, opening with a homage to Vajrasattva and proceeding in verse to expound the secret doctrine of supreme bliss, the nature of the ḍākinīs, and the samaya vows that bind practitioners within this tradition. Its poetry moves through themes of non-duality, self-arisen awareness, and the inseparability of all phenomena within the nature of great bliss, characteristic concerns of the highest tantric literature. It is Toh 368 in the Kangyur, catalogued among the tantric texts, and represents a key scriptural authority within the broader Saṃvara tantric corpus.

In the language of India: Tantra-rāja-śrī-laghu-saṃvara-nāma. In the language of Tibet: The Glorious Concise Saṃvara, King of Tantras.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Glorious Vajrasattva.

Now the secret is to be explained —
in brief, not at length.
The perfect union of the Glorious Heruka
accomplishes every desired aim.
Higher than the highest guru,
it binds the web of ḍākinīs.
In the joy of the supreme secret,
everything eternally abides as one's own nature.

The very essence of all ḍākinīs, the bodhisattva,
is Vajrasattva, the supreme bliss —
this is the self-arisen, heroic Blessed One,
the vow that binds the web of ḍākinīs.

Those who have arrived at renunciation through the manner of sound
move within the domain of the samaya conduct.
Difficult to find in the three worlds,
it abides authentically from beginning through middle to end.
The object to be refined and the means of refinement are brought into perfect union,
exactly as they are.
Endowed with mantra recitation, meditative concentration, and the rest,
the wisdom of the ritual of union itself —
hear it as it is spoken in the tantra
of the supreme, unsurpassed yoga.

At the finest, excellent intervals of breath,
and likewise with perfumed water,
the yogin, at the special time,
should always make offerings to one who holds the lineage.

The messenger born together with the accomplished one —
superior, middling, and lesser —
when the mind dissolves inwardly,
the desired siddhis (Skt. siddhi, spiritual accomplishments) are to be obtained.
With one's own substance of the bindu (Skt. bindu, the seminal essence-drop),
worship the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Through seeing, touching,
hearing, or remembering,
one is freed from all sin —
of this there is no doubt whatsoever.

The yogin himself is the highest merit,
purifying and destroying all sin.
Through recitation of secret mantra, through meditative concentration,
and even through bliss, accomplishment is obtained.
The samaya is to be maintained always.
The practitioner, resting in supreme equanimity:
through violation of the samaya within the maṇḍala,
empowerment and siddhi will not be obtained.

Honey, butter, and camphor
combined with red sandalwood —
when placed within the feast gathering,
all are taken as bearing the vajra-mark.
The ring-finger joined to the thumb:
the wise yogin should always practise this.
As with a peaceful draft that has been tasted,
stable siddhi will be obtained.
This makes one half-deathless
and sets in motion all siddhis.

The four offerings of the great hero
fulfill every wish of the mind.
The one who enters equipoise of the two empowerments —
that one too holds the very equipoise.
The happiness of gods and humans
gathered up — the vajra-holder
who acts in just this way
cannot be withstood even by the sixteen-fold.

On a forest mountain, in a medicinal grove,
on the banks of great rivers,
or in a charnel ground primordially accomplished —
there the maṇḍala is to be drawn.

End of the first chapter, the chapter on entering the maṇḍala, from the Definitive Exposition of the Glorious Heruka.

There, without letting filth fall,
anoint the ground of the maṇḍala.
With charnel-ground ash
and the five nectars (Skt. pañcāmṛta),
anoint the ground of the maṇḍala,
and there draw the maṇḍala properly.
Through meditation in that place,
thoroughly examine it as a charnel ground.

With the ash of burned and crushed corpses
and with charnel-ground owls and pigs,
the excellent maṇḍala is to be drawn.

The master, who possesses good qualities —
who understands correctly and knows the tantra,
who knows the secret mantras of the Glorious Blood-Drinker (Heruka),
who is free from anger, pure, skilled,
who knows the union, goes to the far shore of wisdom —
adorned on the crown with a skull,
his limbs smeared with ash,
his body adorned with hooked ornaments,
and decorated with bone garlands and the like,
a single piece adorning the crown,
bone garlands hanging freely,
a khaṭvāṅga (Skt. khaṭvāṅga, the tantric staff-scepter) held in hand —
having made oneself the glorious Blood-Drinker,
one then recalls the Glorious Blood-Drinker.
This cakra is to be placed at the heart.

Having thus armored oneself in that way,
one places the fence-posts in the directions.
Below, one places weapons.
The cakras, being garlands of weapons,
and above, a net of arrows —
and again, oneself as a tent in the sky:
this becomes the armor of space.
Having thus donned that armor,
even a triple assault will not break through.

Having thus thoroughly protected oneself,
adorned completely with mantras and mudrās,
one draws the terrifying maṇḍala
that bestows the great accomplishment.

Then, a cord without sentience —
or one dampened with great blood —
is used to mark out the terrifying maṇḍala
of the glorious Heruka's supreme citadel.

One cubit, four cubits, or eight cubits across —
four gates on all sides, four corners,
adorned with four archways —
the mantra-practitioner employs it twofold.
One worships the supreme bliss of the ḍākinī net.

In its center, a lotus
with petals, a blazing hub,
provided with stamens, is to be placed.
At the hub is to be placed the hero,
who, though himself fearsome, makes others afraid,
lustrous and blazing intensely,
laughing aloud with the sound "ha ha,"
adorned with garlands of skulls,
noble, with three eyes and four faces,
clad in an elephant hide,
with noble brows, split by a vajra,
holding in hand the khaṭvāṅga and a skull-cup,
adorned with garlands of fifty.

The goddess residing before him
is Vajravārāhī, supremely terrifying,
facing the glorious Heruka,
of fierce aspect, with three eyes.
Her skull-cup filled with entrails,
blood dripping from her mouth,
she points the threatening gesture
in all directions toward gods, demigods, and humans.

Twenty-four ḍākinīs
arisen from Vajravārāhī's lineage
are to be worshipped in the directions and intermediate directions,
and at the center of the cakra.
Likewise here the heroes too
who dwell properly in the cakra are to be worshipped.
If the practitioner desires accomplishment,
he should worship the non-dual heroes.

Then, concerning the vase rite:
there is no black root or anything like that.
Pearls, gold, precious gems,
coral, silver, and copper —
a vessel filled full with all good foodstuffs
is to be placed on top.
The neck is to be wound with cord,
the mouth adorned with petals.
Wrapped well with a pair of cloths,
eight are to be arranged at the gates.
The ninth vase, wrapped well
with a pair of cloths, is placed in the center.
It is to be made beautiful with gold,
silver, precious gems, and pearls.
The entire maṇḍala is to be adorned
and made beautiful with gems and gold.

If one worships the supreme delightful citadel,
there is no doubt one will become accomplished.
One should apply perfumed water excellently
to every face of oneself.
If one desires the supreme accomplishment,
one should offer a hundred lamps.
All the ḍākinīs of the sky
one arranges above with the mind.
Whatever ḍākinīs there are on the earth's surface
are to be placed throughout the entire maṇḍala.
Whatever ḍākinīs are beneath the earth
are to be placed in the regions below the earth.
All the māmakī goddesses are to be placed
in the directions and intermediate directions.
If one desires the supreme accomplishment,
perfume, flowers, and likewise incense —
one worships accordingly according to the rite,
and also offers a hundred lamps.
One worships the heroes and yoginīs
who dwell in the maṇḍala of the glorious Heruka.
Red victory banners, and likewise yellow,
white, black, and tawny,
many garlands of flowers,
likewise various cloths,
upper garments and veils,
beautiful things of every kind —
likewise with food and drink
one arranges them in proper order and makes offering.

This concludes the second chapter, on the rite of worshipping the cakra, from the Pronouncements of the Glorious Heruka.

Then the practitioner, with all material things,
should first please the ācārya (Skt. ācārya, the master).

One who ardently desires accomplishment, dwelling in perfect equipoise,
should honor the master (ācārya) with whatever one is able,
adorning him with tinkling bells that are rung,
with flowers and incense,
sounding the bells very melodiously.
The practitioner beats the drum
and utters the syllable "Ha ha!"

In this way, having duly worshipped the maṇḍala according to the rite,
endowing it with all that is desired,
those beloved disciples, their faces
well covered with fine cloth,
their joined palms filled with flowers,
having properly entered —
the practitioner, dwelling in perfect equipoise,
then leads them in circumambulation,
and with mind well composed and serene
introduces them into the delightful palace.

Facing toward the south,
they then cast the flower from their joined palms —
it is to be cast upon the maṇḍala.
Wherever that flower falls,
the abode and so forth of the glorious Heruka is indicated,
the family of that deity is fully revealed,
and the name of that family is given:
the master then bestows upon the disciple the name of that family.

Then the master, well settled in equipoise,
makes offering with mudrā.
Thereafter, on the following day,
the disciple should engage in the proper activities.

By reciting the great vermilion mantra three times,
one makes the tilaka mark upon them.
The disciple's face is then uncovered,
and the maṇḍala is revealed to them.
Whichever deity's abode it may be,
that is the very place to be properly shown.
Together with the master, and in the presence of the palace,
the disciple then makes a profound bow,
and once again, beginning from the left,
goes around in circumambulation,
and pays homage to the maṇḍala and the master
with the proper rite exactly as prescribed.

Then the disciple presents to the masters
the offering fee (dakṣiṇā) as proclaimed by the Tathāgata:
one hundred or a thousand in gold,
along with various precious gems,
a full hundred pairs of cloth,
elephants and horses and villages,
earrings and bracelets,
fine necklaces and finger-rings,
and vessels of gold held forth as offerings,
an excellent wife and daughters,
male servants and female servants and sisters —
bowing down, one presents them all.

Just as it has been proclaimed, the disciple,
possessed of good understanding, should in the same manner
offer his very self to the master together with all his possessions,
saying: "From this day forward, I am your servant —
thus do I present myself to you."

Then the practitioner, having resolved with full certainty
that the rite has been performed in this way,
will from that point onward be pleased by
the ḍākinīs and the yoginīs.
The ḍākinīs, the Lāmā, and the Khaṇḍarohā,
those who have form —
the practitioner goes together with the ḍākinīs,
accompanying them in all their activities.
Without any doubt, whatever this practitioner does,
all of it will be accomplished.

If one accomplishes this yoga,
one is not turned back in any of the three worlds,
travels through invisible caverns and through the sky,
moves with the swiftness of a gazelle,
and likewise draws in vital essence.
By the practitioner's mere wish,
generation becomes constant and uninterrupted.
One takes on many forms
and travels through the sky.
The ḍākinīs as well, especially,
in that very instant come to meet and assist,
and the wandering beings too are decisively subdued —
by the yogin with a single glance.

One who desires to be a yogin
without having seen the maṇḍala of the mantra-practitioner
is like punching the sky with one's fist,
or like drinking mirage-water:
it is the same.
This yoga is the supreme of the supreme,
the most excellent of all practices.
Whoever constantly harbors such desire —
gods, asuras (demigods), and human beings —
all of these will be overpowered and subdued.

By receiving empowerment in this tantra,
one becomes the practitioner of all,
empowered for the hawk, the gaze, the hand-holding,
the embrace, the union of two, and so forth.
All is most sacred within the tantra.
This one subdues gods and humans wherever it goes.

That very thing — whether called the Concise, or the Saṃvara, or the Secret,
or from the Vajrabhairava —
this king of all maṇḍalas
shall not come to arise where it has not arisen.
Whatever has been taught or not yet taught,
all of it abides in Heruka.

This has been the third chapter, the rite of empowerment with its qualities, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then the ḍākinīs
dwell there in full display.
The Great Diligent Wheel-Turner,
the Great Powerful One, and the Supremely Courageous,
the Armored One of the Wheel, the Ale-Seller,
Khaṇḍarohā, the Force of the Wheel,
the Bird-Faced One and the Horse-Eared One,
the Supremely Lovely and the Green Goddess,
the Ale-Drinker and the Wind-Force,
likewise the Great Terrifier,
the Earth-Guardian and the Tree-Shadow,
the Sovereign of Laṅkā and the Dwarf Woman,
the Heroic Mind and the Great-Nosed One,
the Luminous One and the Fierce-Eyed One,
and the Supremely Fierce — she who accomplishes.
The ḍākinīs number twenty-four.
All of these have been previously accomplished.

At the center of body, speech, and mind,
just as it is on the outside, so too within —
to the mantra that recites one's own name
one appends at the end hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
When the supreme yogi perceives this,
it is fire; the others are comparable to sesame oil.
Oṃ illuminates all,
and brings about every desired accomplishment.
One becomes a hero oneself, and the accomplishment
is the vision of the maṇḍala in one's own dwelling.
From that point onward, let one meditate on it continuously.
Such is the attainment, as the Tathāgata has declared.

This has been the fourth chapter, the chapter on establishing the non-duality of hero and yoginī, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then, so that all things may arise from the dharmodaya (the source of phenomena),
write at the indestructible and auspicious center of the varied design.
The mantra practitioner shall write it according to the rite,
gathering all phenomena into one.
Here the mantra-syllables are these:
having equalized the ā-series and the kā-series,
the totals of each group
shall be known as sets of four.
At the eye of the supreme sage,
the hero abiding there is to be drawn in.
This accomplishes every desired aim.

The fifth of the fourth, and the fifth of the fifth, and the fifth of the fourth within the fifth, and the third of the first, and likewise the twenty-ninth, and the first of the fourth, and the fourth at the end, and the second of that same, and the thirtieth — take it truly — and likewise the twenty-sixth: gather all of these well together; and likewise halves of hundreds; then take thirty-three; and the very first of the first, and the third at the end, and the third of the first, and the thirty-second, and the fifth of the fourth, and the fourth of the fifth, and the first that is at the end, and the third of the second, and the first of the third, and the fifth of the fifth, and the first of the first, and likewise the eleventh, and likewise the sixteenth as the wise know it, and the first of the third, and likewise the twenty-sixth, and the third of the fourth, and the second of the uṣman class, and the first of the first, and likewise the twenty-seventh, and also the twenty-eighth, and the third of the first, and the fourth of the fifth, and likewise take the thirty-first, and the fifteenth, and likewise the twenty-fifth, and the second of the first, and likewise the twenty-sixth, and the letter thirty-two, and the last of the uṣman class, and thirty-two, and the fourth of the fifth, and the third of the second, and the fourth of the fifth, and the third of the uṣman class, and furthermore the twenty-seventh, and the first of the antastha class, and likewise the twenty-first, and the second of the antastha class, and likewise the thirtieth, and the first of the fifth, and the very first of the uṣman class, and likewise the letter dya, and the first of the fourth, and the first of the uṣman class, and likewise the twenty-eighth, and the second of the first, and the very first of the third, and the third of the first, and the fourth of the fourth,

the second of the antastha class, and the fifth of the third, and then take the letter bya, and the fourth of the first, and then the eighth itself, and the fifth of the fourth itself. And the fifth of the fifth, and likewise the twenty-seventh, and the fourth of the fourth, and again the twenty-seventh, and likewise the twenty-sixth, take the twenty-fifth. The thirty-third itself, and the fourth of the fourth, and the fifth of the fifth, and the fifth of the fourth, and the very first of the first, and likewise the twenty-seventh, and the fourth of the antastha class, and likewise the twenty-first, and the second of the uṣman class itself, and likewise the twenty-sixth.

The very first of the first, and the second of the antastha class, and the first of the second, and the second of the sixth. The first of the first, and likewise the second of the antastha class, and the first of the second, and the second of the seventh, and the third of the sixth, and the fifth of the fourth — join the fourth to these. The fourth of the antastha class, and the fifth of the fifth — place the fourth beneath them as a seat. To the first of the fifth, below, add a fire-seat. Likewise the third of the uṣman class, and also the first of the antastha class, and the first of the fourth — these are placed upon a fire-seat.

The third of the seventh, and the first of the sixth — take the first of what is known as the ka-ṣa class. The fourth of the fifth, and the first of the antastha class, and likewise rounded. The fourth of the fifth, and the first of the seventh, and take the fourth of the uṣman class. To the fourth of the seventh, opened by Vajrasattva, the fourth of the uṣman class is made a luminous seat. To the fourth of the seventh, below, is also the fire-seat, fully endowed with a strong virama. The second of the fifth, and likewise the twenty-second, and the second of the sixth, and likewise certainly the eleventh — again take the twenty-second. The first of the third, and the third of the fourth, and the fourth of the uṣman class itself, and the third of the fifth, and the fourth of the seventh — then take the twenty-first. The first of the second, and certainly the first of the fifth — that is the sixth letter from the second. The fourth of the fifth, and likewise what is known as ka-ṣa, and then take the twenty-fourth — again as rounded, and the third of the fifth, and the third of the uṣman class, and the second of the antastha class itself, and the fourth of the fifth — again give light. Below the twentieth letter, place the sixteenth as a seat. Below, illuminate with fire, and the fifth of the fifth, and the third of the antastha class, and the third of the fifth, and the third of the sixth, and the fourth of the antastha class — distinguish with the twenty-fifth.

The fifth of the fourth, and the third of the second — distinguish with the son of the sun. The fourth of the uṣman class, and below, the seat of the water of the fifth, and the third of the first — then make fire the seat. The fourth of the seventh, and below, the seat of the water of the fifth, and the third of the uṣman class itself — to the first of the fifth, the sixteenth is the seat. Then take the twenty-first. The first of the fourth, and the third of the antastha class, and the third of the second, and the first of the fourth, and the fourth of the fifth, and the third of the third, and the third of the first, and the third of the uṣman class itself, and likewise the twenty-first — this is the abiding of luminosity. The third of the fifth, and the first of the fourth, and the third of the third —

it is to be made clear from above by fire. It is taught as the first of those abiding at the end. Then, below the sixteenth syllable, the third of the third — mark the crown with the fire syllable. Likewise the twenty-sixth itself: the first of the first, and the first of the second, and the fourth of the third — pressed by the thirteenth. Likewise the first of the first, and the first of the second, and the fourth of the third — above these, the thirteenth itself, and on the fourth of the uṣman class, the twenty-seventh makes the seat. On the seed of the eighth of the antastha class, made luminous by the light-maker. On the third of the second, the fifteenth makes the seat. On the third of the second, add the fifth of the third. Having gathered the seed of ka and ṣa, the twenty-fifth makes the seat. Having gathered the beautiful round one, the syllable ma makes the seat. The fourth of the uṣman class itself, and the fourth of the seventh, and the seed of the eighth of the antastha group — likewise it is established as the thirty-third. Having fully gathered the nature of the fifth, it is again the second for that. The first of the second, and the third of those abiding at the end, and likewise the thirty-second: the third of the sixth, and the fourth of the seventh, and likewise the third of the sixth, and the fourth of the fifth, and the third of the sixth — each pair forms four feet. This is the secret mantra of the king of vidyās (vidyārāja), which fully accomplishes all activities. There is nothing more supreme than this in the three worlds. If one knows the mantra of Glorious Heruka, it is like fire — the others are like chaff. It is renowned as the root mantra.

This has been the fifth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of gathering the syllables of the root mantra, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Furthermore, the twenty-two syllables, the seven syllables of the heart and near-heart, the seed of the eighth of the antastha group, and likewise, having discarded the middle syllables of the twelve that evoke and hook — the six limbs are Heruka, joined in union with the six heroes, each syllable perfectly residing. Oṃ, namaḥ, svāhā, bauṣaṭ, hūṃ hūṃ, and phaṭ — perfectly endowed with these. The practitioner should know them as the heart. The first is to be placed at the heart itself. The second is to be known at the crown. The third is applied at the top of the crown. The fourth is indeed the armor. The fifth has become the eyes. The sixth is held to be called the weapon.

This has been the sixth chapter, the chapter on gathering the armor of the six heroes, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then, the thirteen vowels themselves — combine with the second syllables. The eleven complete vowels are to be adorned with the sixth syllable. The fourth vowel itself is also combined with the seventh syllable. The eleven vowels — the skilled one combines them with the eighth syllable. Endowed with the second vowel, it is to be adorned with the ninth syllable. The second vowel syllable itself is combined with the twelfth syllable. Endowed with the second vowel, take the twenty-first syllable. The skilled one combines the fourteenth syllable with the twentieth syllable. The third vowels themselves are combined with the fifteenth syllable. Endowed with the fifteenth vowel, adorn the sixteenth syllable. Endowed with the third vowel syllable, it is held to be the seventeenth syllable. The second vowels themselves are combined with the eighteenth syllable. The second of the vowel syllables is combined with the twenty-first syllable. The fifth vowel syllable is combined with the twenty-third syllable. The thirteenth vowel syllable is combined with the twenty-fourth syllable. Having taken the first group, it is combined with the twenty-fifth syllable. Endowed with the second vowel, it becomes the twenty-sixth syllable. The twenty-eighth itself —

The fifteenth vowel syllable is combined with it. Endowed with the very first of the third group, with the lower portion combined with fire — likewise it is combined with the second vowel syllable. That is the twenty-ninth syllable.

The thirty-first syllable is combined with the second vowel syllable. The thirty-second syllable is combined with the thirteenth vowel syllable. The thirty-third syllable is to be endowed with the sun. Combined with the fourth vowel syllable itself, the syllable endowed as the thirty-fourth accomplishes all desired aims. The fifth vowel syllables themselves, combined as the thirty-seventh, accomplish the ḍākinīs. These thirty-eighth syllables, combined with the second vowel syllable — that all the gods are accomplished by this very one, there is no doubt. As for the forty-second, the practitioner should combine fire with the lower portion of it. The forty-third itself is combined with the fifth vowel syllable. The forty-fifth syllable is combined with the second vowel syllable. The fifth vowel syllables themselves, endowed as the forty-sixth, constitute the supreme worship of all heroes. The forty-seventh itself, combined with the second vowel syllable — this is none other than supreme Vajrasattva. Likewise the fifty-first, adorned with the fifth vowel syllables, is held to be supremely beautiful. The fifty-second itself, combined with the second vowel syllable — that it accomplishes all the gods, there is no doubt. Likewise the fifty-third is combined with the thirteenth vowel syllable. The fifty-sixth syllable is also combined with the sixth vowel syllable — it is that which definitively slays enemies. The fourth of the semi-vowels (antastha) is combined with the second vowel syllable. Likewise it is combined with the fifteenth, and it accomplishes all siddhis. That becomes the fifty-ninth syllable.

The sixty-first syllable itself is combined with the second vowel syllable — this is declared to be supremely excellent. Likewise the sixty-second, combined with the third vowel syllable, is held to be supreme among ḍākinīs. The sixty-third syllable itself is fully endowed with the eleventh vowel syllable — it is the supreme of all beautiful syllables. Likewise the sixty-fifth: these seeds opened by Vajrasattva are the supreme divine substance, bestowing attainment, bestowing great liberation. The sixty-sixth syllable is also combined with the third vowel syllable — it bestows accomplishment in all activities. Thus it was taught by the Tathāgata. The sixty-seventh syllable is fully endowed with the second vowel syllable — that it constitutes all the activities of the yoginī, there is no doubt. As for the sixty-eighth as well, the syllable pa is combined with it. The lower portion of this seed syllable is to be examined. The seventy-first syllable is perfectly combined with the second vowel syllable — that this is the beauty of all syllables, there is no doubt. The seventy-fourth itself, combined with the second vowel syllable — from the very beginning it is accomplished: thus it was spoken from the mouth of the Tathāgata. The seventy-fifth syllable itself is endowed with the sixth mātr̥kā syllable. This is the supreme yoga — it is the highest for all activities. The seventy-sixth itself, endowed with the second vowel syllable, is to be analyzed by means of the sun, and the syllable pa is to be combined with it there. There is no other that is supremely beautiful. The seventy-seventh syllable — with that, the syllable dha is to be combined. This seed is the supreme divine substance, held to be the adornment of the ḍākinīs. The seventy-eighth itself, endowed with the second vowel syllable — this seed is the supremely excellent, held to be the supreme among causes. The eighty-first syllable distinguishes itself by the extremity of the fourth. This itself is what accomplishes from the very beginning.

It enters into all accomplishments. The eighty-second syllable is to be combined with the second vowel syllable. It is the fifth from among the mātṛkās. Likewise the eighty-eighth syllable is the fifth from among the mātṛkās. The eighty-ninth syllable is the fifth from among the mātṛkās. Likewise the ninetieth syllable is the fifth from among the mātṛkās. The ninety-first syllable is the second from among the mātṛkās. The ninety-sixth syllable is the second from among the vowels. The ninety-ninth syllable terrifies the malicious and brings bliss to mantra practitioners. The thirteenth of the vowels, possessed of the second syllable — the thirteenth of the vowels itself, possessed of the fifth syllable — destroys the malicious and brings bliss to the ḍākinīs. The fourteenth of the vowels, possessed of the eighth syllable, with the fifteenth as its seat — the fourteenth of the vowels, possessed of the ninth syllable, is marked on the crown with a bindu. It especially delights the accomplishing ḍākinīs. The eleventh of the vowels, endowed with the twelfth, is marked on the crown with a bindu. It terrifies all elemental spirits and brings benefit to practitioners. Endowed with the eleventh, the thirteenth syllable itself is beautifully adorned with a bindu. It terrifies all elemental spirits and brings benefit to practitioners. The fifth of the vowels, endowed with the thirty-second syllable — the third of the vowels, endowed with the thirty-third syllable — the second of the vowels, endowed with the thirty-fourth syllable — the second of the vowels, endowed with the thirty-sixth syllable — endowed with the first second, the thirty-seventh syllable is endowed with the third of the vowels, applied to the fortieth syllable. The eleventh of the mātṛkās, endowed with the fortieth syllable — the forty-first syllable is the third of the vowels. Endowed with the forty-second syllable is the third of the vowels. Endowed with the forty-fourth syllable is the second of the mātṛkās. Endowed with the forty-eighth syllable is the second of the vowels. Endowed with the forty-ninth syllable is the fifth of the mātṛkās. Endowed with the fifty-third syllable — the fifty-fourth syllable is also beautifully adorned with a bindu. The fifty-fifth syllable, marked on the crown with a bindu, is to be combined with the second of the vowels. The fifty-seventh syllable is pressed upon the crown with a bindu. The second of the vowels — the fifty-eighth syllable is the second of the mātṛkās, applied to the sixty-fifth. The second of the mātṛkās, endowed with the sixty-eighth syllable, draws in all accomplishments and bestows glory upon practitioners. The fourth of the mātṛkās, endowed with the seventy-first syllable, is also beautifully adorned with a bindu. The fourth of the mātṛkās, endowed with the seventy-second syllable, subjugates all sentient beings and is pressed evenly with a bindu. Determined as the fourteenth of the vowels, it is the seventy-third syllable. The fourteenth of the mātṛkās, endowed with the seventy-fourth syllable, is likewise beautifully adorned with a bindu. The second of the vowels, endowed with the seventy-fifth syllable — the second of the mātṛkās, endowed with the seventy-eighth syllable, applied to the sixty-fifth. The second of the mātṛkās, endowed with the sixty-eighth syllable — marked above with a bindu — the fourth of the mātṛkās, and the seventy-ninth syllable is pressed upon the crown with a bindu. The sixth of the vowels — for producing the king of horses, adorned with bindu and nāda.

The third of the vowels, endowed with the sixteenth syllable — the count of syllables stands at one hundred and ninety-eight. This has been gathered from the Remig. It is to be known as the supreme root mantra of glorious Heruka, the protector. It is the abode of all accomplishments and the destroyer of the heart-essence of the ḍākinīs. Glorious Heruka, king of the blood-drinking deity lineage — by recitation it accomplishes all that is meaningful. The syllable Oṃ comes first; Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ is applied at the end. This root mantra is the accomplisher of all practices.

This concludes the seventh chapter, the ritual of gathering the mantra, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then all the heroes of one's own being in union together — the wheel of great bliss, the net of ḍākinīs, is held to be supreme. Hā svā raṃ ba saṃ la jā nīki ḍā phaṭ hūṃ hūṃ kaṃ ru ru he he vajra śrī oṃ. The heart-essence of the king of awareness shall not arise if it has not arisen. Ṭpha hūṃ heṃ hrīṃ haṃ oṃ. The syllable Pāṃ and the syllable Yāṃ, the syllable Māṃ and Hrīṃ itself, Hūṃ and Phaṭ — these are spoken of as the six yoginīs. Oṃ vajra vairocānīye hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. The great awareness of the ḍākinī shall not arise if it has not arisen. Upon the earth are the four precious ones; the mantra of the garland is supreme. The great awareness of the ḍākinī — Heruka, the king of awareness.

This concludes the eighth chapter, the ritual of gathering the mantra of the reversed heart-essence and the six yoginīs, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Now the supreme activities of the root secret mantra shall be explained in their proper sequence. Whatever exists throughout the three worlds — all of it is accomplished in an instant; it performs all activities. By mere recollection, it slays the birthplaces of all gods, all nāgas, all yakṣas, and all gandharvas. It disperses all clouds and brings down rain and repels it. It dries up oceans. It causes rivers to reverse their current and flow. It repels the sense faculties. By reciting this secret mantra one hundred thousand times, it causes the earth to tremble; one climbs a tree and is able to travel wherever one desires. It seizes all mantras and seizes all accomplishments. It draws blood forth and releases it again. It multiplies one's form into many hundreds of thousands. If one wishes, one can appear, and if one wishes, one can become invisible. It reduces palaces, treetops, and the like to dust. It transforms poison into nectar and also turns nectar into poison. It turns the moon into water and water into the moon. It seizes all fragrance. It transfers one to wherever one wishes. The face of the sky-soaring garuda, and the goddess of gathering peace who draws out beings — the prosperity that rests in the palm of that supreme person who practices everywhere cannot be seized by any other. All fruits of accomplishment belonging to one who is possessed of a ritual such as this shall become one's portion. By mere recollection it slays and generates fire. It causes utter destruction beneath the earth; it brings down hail and repels it, and by mere recollection it generates lightning. It sets the reflected images of all gods to dancing. If, in order to accomplish something, one recites just once while calling someone by name, that person will die on the spot. One will come to enjoy all the earth without remainder. If one wishes, one can gather it all. For this, O Blessed One, ascetic discipline is not required; conduct and fasting are not required — through this ritual of intentional activity, perform whatever activities are desired. If one recites just once in anger, one will slay ten million. If one recites with calm, it gives life.

If one recites once over charcoal from a charnel ground and then pokes it at someone, that person will fall down on the spot. If one recites fully over ash and then pokes it at someone, that person will on the spot be seized by a flesh-eating compulsion. If one recites once over charcoal from a charnel ground and then writes someone's name on a flat stone or the like, that person will be seized by a great possessing spirit. If one recites once over a stalk of white atimuktaka flower and then pokes it at someone, that person will on the spot come rushing with the force of the wind. If one recites once over a thorn and strikes someone with it, that person will become paralyzed. One will be able to go wherever one desires. If one recites once over an incense offering of bdellium resin and applies it as perfume, it will cause all sentient beings to be subdued. If one recites once over the hand and covers someone with it, it will cure poison seized by a black demon. Water over which one has recited once will release what has been sealed by the ḍākinīs. If one recites once over a stalk of the karavīra plant, one will be able to transfer to whatever womb one desires.

Glorious Heruka is wisdom itself.
One who desires attainments without knowing this
is like one beating a hat —
without this secret mantra,
neither attainments nor happiness
will any person obtain.
Not knowing this secret mantra,
a yogin who still seeks attainments —
that person's efforts are pointless,
and the fruit will not be obtained.
This secret mantra bestows
all attainments for those who enjoy desire.
The practitioner who knows the mantras, mudrās,
and what the Sugata has taught —
through the tastes and so on of foods and drinks,
including the foods and drinks of the tsaru rite,
will accomplish every attainment.

This concludes the ninth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of activity for the root mantra, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Now the three bodies shall be explained.
The blood-drinking one, glorious non-dual union —
whoever knows this even just to know it,
will without doubt be accomplished right here.
The three bodies are to be explained.
When the practitioner becomes one who embodies the dharmakāya body,
at that time, in regard to one who has come to have good mind,
gnosis will speak as "I."
When the practitioner becomes one who embodies the saṃbhogakāya body,
then in regard to meditative equipoise,
the complete enjoyment will speak fully as "I."
When the practitioner becomes one who embodies the nirmāṇakāya body,
at that time, with that mind one-pointed,
I will also speak as the nirmāṇakāya.
Gnosis, saṃbhogakāya, and nirmāṇakāya —
these will truly and certainly be attained.
As for realizing oneself as Śrī Heruka,
of this there is no doubt.
The essence of this secret mantra —
listen, practitioner, I shall explain the secret.

By reciting the essence, one will travel and come and go surpassing ten million leagues. One will create many hundreds of thousands of forms. One will ascend to fine buildings, trees, and houses, and will travel together with the ḍākinīs up to a distance of ten million leagues. One will move in nothing other than going and coming through the sky. If one wishes, one will appear visible; if one wishes, one will become invisible. If one wishes, one will take on the form of a child, an old person, or one in the prime of youth. If one wishes, one will take on the form of an elephant, a buffalo, a bull, a tiger, a lion, a fine horse, a cat, a rabbit, or a vixen. If one wishes, one will take on the form of a peacock, a hen, a goose, a crane, a heron, an owl, a hawk, a vulture, or a crow. One will take on whatever form one desires. One will steal another's voice, steal another's hearing, steal another's sense of smell, steal another's sense of taste. One will draw out whomever one desires, or cause that person to become paralyzed.

This concludes the tenth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of activity for the mantra of the essence that accomplishes the three bodies, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then furthermore, what will arise for the practitioner within the span of seven lifetimes — by merely relying on that, one will swiftly enter into accomplishment (siddhi). The attainment of accomplishment will now be explained.

Whatever person has become fragrant of body, speaks truthfully, goes for a long time without blinking, becomes free from anger, and from whose mouth fragrant breath arises — that person has taken human birth for seven consecutive lifetimes.

If one relies upon a seventh shadow that moves with the gait of a goose and is endowed with compassion and correctness, in that one's heart there is Vairocana. One takes that, recites the mantra of the essence of glorious Heruka one hundred and eight times, and forms it into a pellet — it will float upward and travel ten million leagues.

By merely relying upon that, one will become possessed of the gnosis of the three worlds. In a single day one will be able to travel and return a distance of fifty million leagues. One will also attain the body of a god. Whoever knows the essence of glorious Heruka will be able to grant whatever is desired, to whomever it is desired.

This concludes the eleventh chapter, the chapter on the ritual of the defining marks of the seventh lifetime, from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then the near-essence is this:
It causes all accomplishments to arise,
and whatever transforms in the three worlds —
all of it, it is taught, is accomplished in an instant.

Ṭpha hūṃ huṃ ha ha hrīḥ oṃ.

This is the near-essence of the essence. By reciting this secret mantra one hundred thousand times, one will cause the three worlds to tremble. It will summon gods, asuras, yakṣas, rākṣasas, nāgas, gandharvas, and kiṃnaras. It will dry up or suppress oceans, rivers, lakes, and the like. In whatever place one recites it, all ḍākinīs will come to be under the command of the practitioner.

If one recites this extensively over water and washes one's own eyes with it, those born in seven successive lifetimes will come to be unknown. Even one whose life-span is exhausted will appear as though dying, and one with long life will appear as though alive. If one praises this mantra at the eye and gazes upon someone, that person will be suppressed.

Take the sole-skin from the foot of a deceased hero, tie it with human blood, insert it into the socket of a skull used as eye-medicine for the ears, and mix it with longevity resin, musk, saffron, and blood. Dry it on a shadow, then bind it with three iron nails. When the star Rohiṇī is especially ascendant, place this activity offering into the mouth of glorious Heruka and cover it with the left hand. Then, reciting one hundred and eight times, that very person will in that very moment become invisible and will cast no shadow — if even the gods cannot see one, what need is there to mention the people on the surface of the earth? Likewise, if one removes it from the mouth, one will become visible again.

The pill for the accomplishment of sky-faring set forth in this tantra was spoken by the hero himself.

If one recites this mantra — the near-essence of the essence of glorious Heruka — over the tip of the index finger and rubs the flesh away from a skull, that will draw out its blood. Rubbing repeatedly with the left hand causes it to flow forth. Reciting it intensely and pressing a fist down onto the skull — calling out the name of whomever it is done for — will cause that person's head to split open. Keeping the secret mantra in mind and filling the skull with milk will bring swift pacification.

If one recites the mantra over musk and forms it into a pellet and looks upon someone with it, that person will be bound in restraint. If one recites over the index finger and points it as a threatening gesture at someone, that person will fall down on the spot.

If one recites the mantra and stamps the foot upon the ground, calling out the name of whomever it is done for, that person will die in that very moment. If one recites over water and scatters it on the ground, that person will be revived.

If one recites the mantra on the tip of the index finger and then points it as a threatening gesture toward a thousand, all those upon whom one looks will be subdued. By a word they will be released.

If one recites the mantra one hundred times over the ashes of a mole and rubs them on whatever sentient being one calls to mind, that being will become bound in form.

If one recites one hundred times over the ashes of a fire of burnt offering and rubs them on a person, even the gods themselves will not be able to see that one. If one scatters water recited over one hundred times, the person will become visible again.

If one joins together the skull mudrā, binds it, and without breathing recites from the name of a person, that person will go mad. Even a thousand people will go mad. By an act of mind they will be released.

If one recites the name of a person and ties ten knots in a topknot, all the ḍākinīs will depart. If one goes to an empty house and recites one hundred times, binds it at the crown of the head, and opens the eyes wide, for as long as one recites one will be invisible. When released, one will become visible again.

If one recites the mantra directly over gravel and scatters it above, below, and in all the directions and intermediate directions, all gods (devas), asuras, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, kinnaras, and great serpents will be bound. All the powers of the ḍākinīs will be seized.

If one looks upon a gathering of men and women at a seat and bed and recites the mantra one hundred and eight times, they will become stuck fast. By an act of mind they will be released.

If one recites fully over a ship together with its rigging and places it in a river, the current will reverse its direction and flow back. That same ship with its rigging will subdue the waves. By an act of mind they will be reversed.

If one recites the mantra and looks upward while reciting one thousand times, a great rain will be cut off. If an enemy army appears before one, and one recites one thousand times and enters into battle, even if pierced by a hundred weapons, no sensation of harm will arise, and one will not be cut through by weapons. One will attain a vajra body.

This concludes the twelfth chapter, the ritual chapter on the essence-mantra activity, from the Declared Praise of the Glorious Heruka.


Then the armoring rites:

Whatever exists within the three worlds,
all that the mind desires,
shall be explained in due order.

Regarding the armoring: while reciting the armor mantra upon entering a road, one will have no fear of thieves or tigers, or will become invisible. While reciting the armor mantra and entering the women's quarters of a royal palace, one will similarly be invisible, will take whatever one desires, and go. Even the gods will not see one.

With the hand that has recited the armor mantra one hundred times, whomever one touches will become rigid like a spear. Not even the thirty-three gods can make that person move. If one strikes with the foot that has recited the mantra, that person will be freed.

If one recites the mantra three times over one's own blood, forms it into a drop, and speaks together with someone or is seen by someone, or sees another, it causes the drawing of blood from all of them. If one recites the mantra one thousand times with anger in the house of a person, a plague will strike everyone there in sequence. If one recites over water five times and scatters it, the person will revive.

If one recites while looking at a person's face, one will seize that person's speech. If one stands at the bank of a flowing stream or in a swamp and recites one thousand times, one will rest upon the surface of the water and travel over the water just as on dry land. If one enters the water, one can rest there even in a river or an ocean.

If one clasps the two hands together and twists them and recites one thousand times, the yoginīs will come under one's power.

The yoginī of varied form,
and likewise the ḍākinī and the lāmā —

Khaṇḍaroha likewise,
and Rūpavatī, the supremely renowned —
these and all such yoginīs
will every one come under that one's power.

One makes cloth using the conjunction of the asterism Jyeṣṭhā, and wearing a garment made of it, one enters meditative equipoise with the yoginīs and recites ten thousand times; through that, success will follow. Wearing that garment upon one's body, one will become invisible in the sky for a distance of a thousand leagues. One will travel wherever one wishes. One will travel to lands at the farthest reaches of the ocean. One will travel along the stream above.

Whatever faculty one travels upon,
by the intrinsic nature of each of those one proceeds.
Through the supreme practice of meditative equipoise,
all becomes the intrinsic nature of a buddha.

One takes the vital essence of all trees together, recites one thousand times, and drops a single dot upon whatever one wishes — that thing turns to wood. If one recites seven times over water and scatters it, the one who has died will revive. If one takes dust from the sole of an elephant's foot together with dust of the object to be accomplished, recites one thousand times, and smears it upon someone, that person becomes an elephant.

This is the thirteenth chapter, the ritual chapter on the armour mantra, from the Definitive Exposition of the glorious Heruka.

Now, the lord of yogins in the form of a donkey — in order to reverse the force of the mind, the practice by which accomplishment is achieved shall be explained from here.

The ḍākinī, likewise the lāmā,
Khaṇḍaroha, possessed of a form of desire —
in the form of a donkey, face dripping blood,
the ḍākinī bearing a three-pointed implement in hand.
When one accomplishes this, the exhaustion of one's life
as well as long life will appear.
Here, the lord of yogins in the form of a donkey —
in just the same way one sees a donkey.
One who previously goes forward as an elephant itself
is seen and is possessed of the form of an elephant.
Whatever births, whatever beings,
those who were born in former lives —
their various forms will appear:
the yogin will see them here in this very place.
If from before, throughout seven births,
one has had the power to bestow accomplishment,
then one who performs torma rites
will, having done so, attain accomplishment.
Likewise, in an instant one travels
over a distance of a hundred thousand leagues.
This is the chief supreme yoga and mantra,
effecting the practice of union with the ḍākinīs.
Whatever is recited bearing the marks of the yogin,
in one month accomplishment will come.
This indeed is the virtuous mantra-essence
of this secret tantra.
One who knows this supreme reality here
is without doubt a yogin.
In the vow of the ḍākinī net,
all of these are being declared.

This is the fourteenth chapter, the ritual chapter of glorious Heruka acting in the form of a donkey, from the Definitive Exposition of the glorious Heruka.

Then, those who know which vow has been transgressed — through that very knowledge accomplishment is declared, without doubt.

Ḍā is said to mean a male being.
Ḍī means a woman.
Pū means to press down.
Sū means to eat.
Mā is said to mean mother.
Yā means wife.
Bhī likewise means sister.
Bī is said to mean female friend.
Lu means daughter.
Śrī is to be understood as blood.
So means a peaceful drink.
Pe likewise means a drink.
He likewise means flesh.
Bha means to eat.
Bhu means to mix.
Pī likewise means a charnel ground.
Dhu is to be understood as a corpse.
Bhī is said to mean yoginī.
Ga likewise means lāmā.
Strī means a woman possessed of form.
Ku likewise means ḍākinī.
Ha is Khaṇḍaroha itself.
Ja means two gifts.
Ka means a pair of shoulders.
Bha is said to mean an empty vessel.
Sā means something well-arrived.
Mi means fish.
Ba means to eat.
Pe means to drink a drink.
Gha means what is traversable and what is not.
Kā means desire.
Sa means one who does not go elsewhere.

Ra means a woman without a husband.
Ṅu means a woman of bad conduct.
Su means a woman of good fortune.
Na means a woman of ill fortune.
Sa means one who possesses sacred commitments.
A means one who lacks sacred commitments.
Ā means what has come.
Na means what has not come.
So means what is attached.

These are the codes of the individual syllables. They cause one to perceive heroes and sisters, and they render the supreme sacred commitment, which is pleasing and beneficial, available to the respectful and the disrespectful alike — yet it is to be given to the respectful.

This is the fifteenth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of syllabic codes, from the Explicit Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then, the fortunate and the less than fortunate — I shall set forth a brief but excellent explanation. Abiding in the color of the sacred commitment, it brings benefit and is pleasing to the fortunate. It is to be generously given to those who are respectful. Now, when the divisions of lineage are to be distinguished: the hero, the non-dual, and the yoginī — by the one who knows even these alone, the practitioner will attain accomplishment.

A woman whose lotus-stem is white throughout, whose eyes are long like lotus petals, who always delights in white garments, and who bears the fragrance of sandalwood and saffron, and who delights in the assembly of Sugatas — know her to be of that lineage born of bone.

One whose forehead is like refined gold, who delights in red and yellow garments, and who bears the fragrance of jātī and campā — she will become a follower of the hero.

One who is as blue-green as an utpala flower, who delights in holding blue garments, and who bears a fragrance appearing like that of a blue utpala — the hero follows her in mind.

The woman who is beautiful, whose skin resembles white lotus petals, and who always bears the fragrance of the root of the lotus — in the same way, she is in the heart of the hero.

The woman who is red and white, of fair form with a red mouth, and who bears the fragrance of mālikā and utpala — she is of the Vajra lineage.

The woman who is yellow-green, who delights in wearing white garments, and who bears the fragrance of flowers on her head — she is a follower of the Tathāgata lineage.

The woman who is red of complexion, who delights in wearing garments of that same color, and who always bears the fragrance of camphor — she is a follower of the Vairocana lineage.

Thus I have explained the seven types of yoginī lineage. They always delight in left-handed conduct, and each is pervaded by the color of her own lineage. The seed-syllable of the lineage-awareness, too, is here conformed to the lineage. For this there are six colors. One binds with one's own mudrā and speaks in words arising from one's own lineage.

As for the woman who moves from the left — examine the yoginī too on the left. One who speaks very loudly should be observed with a leftward gaze. The woman who, upon seeing women, speaks excellently — she is said to possess sacred commitments.

A woman who makes supplications, who clearly recites the seed-syllable of her lineage, who does not abandon the activity of her lineage, who does not forsake the sacred words of her own scripture, and who repeats the awareness-syllable of her own lineage — she is declared to possess sacred commitments.

As for paying homage: one who consistently bows with her body turned to the left, and who speaks openly with the goddesses — that one will certainly come to truth.

One who traces a mark on the ground with her left thumb and foot, who nods her head, who looks to the side and with her left hand, who in particular recalls to the practitioner his own awareness — and who shows a finger to the cheek or ear and to the nose, who glances sideways, recites the mantra once, and then looks knowingly — the yoginī who comes to truth in this way is certainly one who possesses sacred commitments.

This is the sixteenth chapter, the chapter on the certain examination of the characteristics of yoginīs, from the Explicit Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then, the rare yoginī, and likewise the ḍākinīs —

The five nectars (Skt. pañcāmṛta) perfectly arise.
Yāminī, and Bhayaṅkarī,
Vānadurgā, and likewise Trāsinī,
Sarvarūpacāriṇī, and the beautiful ones —
the seven bhāsura ḍākinīs:
their condensed defining characteristics are here explained.

Rūpiṇī, and Tsumbiṇī,
Lāmā with her retinue of children,
the irresistible Ehikā goddess —
the ḍākinīs are declared to be seven.

She who gazes with intense longing,
who dances while raising her eyebrows,
who first gathers a form to herself
and afterward causes it to dissolve —
she is to be known as Rūpiṇī.
The hero is to be shown the non-dual.

Whether mature or not yet mature,
she who embraces a child and presses it close —
she is to be known as Tsumbiṇī,
the ḍākinī who destroys evil.

She who glances sideways, with a frown upon her face,
who twists her brows and points a warning finger,
who breathes out in a terrifying way —
and here, none other breathes in fear —
she who thus terrifies:
she is shown to be Lāmā.

Pigs and bears, mongooses,
jackals, goats, and horses —
she who terrifies all of these,
so utterly transformed, is thus described.

She who laughs with the greatest delight
and, having gone, does not return,
who with longing desires to be fed —
that is Khaṇḍarohā, so described.

She whose mind arises, touching with a hand,
or with a shoulder, or with a foot,
or with the hem of a garment, or with wood —
one touched by her will not survive.
She is to be known as the irresistible one;
she is declared to be one not to be approached.

She who speaks with laughter, without cause,
weeping and then erupting in great fury —
she is to be remembered as Ehikā,
a goddess who speaks in an empty, hollow manner,
and always speaks of awakening.
She herself arises from the vajra family.

The family seal of the ḍākinīs
is to be made known so that the hero may approach.
A skull, a foe's tusk, a wheel, a vajra, a victory banner,
a sword — all of them bearing terror —
a conch: these eight are to be known.
They are explained as the family seals.

This is the seventeenth chapter, the chapter on the ritual showing the complete transformation of the form, the hand-emblems, and the seals of all the yoginīs, from the Explicit Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

Then, furthermore, what remains to be explained:

The supreme rank of the ḍākinī —
whoever fully knows this
abides within the sacred commitments of the ḍākinīs.

A woman who is ruddy and yellowish in complexion,
who emits the fragrance of a lotus,
whose gaze is naturally peaceful,
and who follows with a lingering, longing look —
such a woman, ruddy-yellow in color,
shows loving-kindness to all people likewise.
When a lotus scent pervades her home,
she has arisen from the Lotus family, sovereign of the dance.

One who has a triple peak between the brows,
whose body complexion is pale and clear,
who always meditates on the Vajra family,
in whose home the vajra scent pervades,
and who constantly makes offerings —
that ḍākinī is the glorious one,
arisen from the Heruka family.

One on whose forehead a triple peak appears
along with the semblance of short spears,
whose eyes are red, whose complexion is red-yellow,
and likewise whose feet and hands are red,
who always finds delight of mind
in the home of goats, birds, and the like,
and in whose home the mark of the vajra
is always present as an object of offering —
she has arisen from the form of Glorious Heruka:
she is unquestionably a ḍākinī.

She on whose forehead, or whose hands,
a wheel appears, resembling dark blue clouds,
who always binds a cloth at her forehead,
who gathers with great good fortune,
who is supremely blissful,
in whose home the wheel scent pervades,
and who constantly makes offerings to it —
she is swollen with the power of the ḍākinī
arisen from the family of Vajravārāhī.

She whose eyebrows resemble black collyrium,
whose teeth are white and prominent,
who is always contrary on the left side,
who has become possessed of great courage of heart,
who always takes delight in bathing —

who does not speak much,
who draws the vajra in her home,
who always makes offerings with virtue —
she is arisen from the family of Vajravārāhī
and is possessed of a thousandfold power.

She who is tawny and appears with a golden complexion,
whose eyes are still and whose facial hair is yellow,
and on whose forehead, or whose hands,
the vajra appears —
she always dwells in realms of sovereignty,
is proud and speaks truthfully,
and from her arises the fragrance of mālika flowers.
In whose home the vajra
is always drawn and greatly honored —
she is arisen from the family of Khaṇḍarohā,
the supreme sovereign among yoginīs.

She who always delights in flesh,
who is lean, with dark collyrium-black eyes,
and on whose forehead there is something resembling a spear-point,
who delights in fierce deeds,
who always frequents charnel grounds,
who is fearless and without impurity,
on whose forehead there is a bindu,
and in whose home skulls are drawn and honored —
she is arisen from the ḍākinī family
of the glorious Heruka.

That woman whose complexion resembles clouds,
whose teeth are uneven,
who always delights in fierce deeds,
whose left fang is bared —
in whose home enemy-stakes
are always drawn and offered —
she is arisen from the family of the Guide,
and that she is a ḍākinī is beyond all doubt.

These assemblies of ḍākinīs are arisen from the family of Śrī Heruka.
For the benefit of the practitioner,
they are emanations bearing secret marks.

This concludes the eighteenth chapter, the chapter on the definitive rite of the signs of the marks and characteristics of the color of all yoginīs, from the Definitive Explanation of the Glorious Heruka.

Now, what is to be correctly explained
is especially the distinguishing marks of the lāmā —
namely, one who correctly knows
all the limbs and their parts.

She whose face is fully blossomed,
appearing round on all sides,
who always has a mark upon her lip,
whose body hair and eyebrows are long,
whose clothing is fine, clean, and peaceful,
who is unmoving and speaks truthfully,
who always delights in the sacred Dharma —
she is declared to be the sister of a hero.
To her one should give the lotus mudrā,
or perform the tortoise mudrā.
Pouring over the orb of skin
is said to be the response to the mudrā.
On the occasion of the tenth day of the lunar month
she will draw a lotus in her home.
These are the characteristics
of lāmā women.

She whose two lips are broad, whose eyes are long in their line,
whose eyes are reddish tinged with yellow,
who is wealthy, of good fortune, and possessed of glory,
who appears white, resembling a campaka flower,
who is neither very tall nor short,
who delights in varied garments,
who has three lines on her forehead,
and whose brow is turned upward at the corners,
who is raucous and joyful,
who treads the path forcefully and with presence,
who always delights in accounts
of those who die in battle —
upon seeing such a one who is supremely proud,
one should display the spear mudrā,
and likewise show the dance
of the left leg drawn up.
Turning away from the left side
is said to be the response to the mudrā.
The fourteenth and the eighth of the lunar month
are declared to be her auspicious times.
In her home she draws a three-pointed spear
and always honors it.
These are the characteristics
of the lāmā of Lokeśvara.

She in whose cheeks
there appear dimples when present,
who similarly is always reddish and tinged with yellow,
whose eyes appear greenish-yellow,
whose hair likewise is curling,
who appears with silk bound at head and forehead,
who is supremely settled with a single mark,
likewise whose neck is long,
who always delights in red clothing,
who is raucous and sings songs,
who is suddenly prone to anger,
whose mind is thoroughly restless,
and who delights in quarreling —

Upon seeing one with such extreme pride,
one should bestow the spear mudrā.
With effort, a second time,
one should bestow the bell mudrā.
Turning to the left
is said to be the answer to the mudrā.

She who is short, with thick limbs,
who always delights in yellow clothing,
and whose garments hang loose from the shoulders —
upon seeing such a woman,
one should display the wheel mudrā,
and with effort, a second time,
one should display the conch mudrā.
Turning completely to the left
is said to be the answer to the mudrā.
The fourteenth is her auspicious time;
at her home one inquires with the vajra.
These are the characteristics
of the lāmā of Śrī Heruka.

She whose entire body is covered with hair,
whose eyes are fixed and yellowish,
who is stout with an unbearable countenance,
whose face is broad and whose mouth is wide,
whose belly is large and drooping, and who is dark in complexion,
whose eyes are round and whose nose is impaired,
who is always skilled in singing,
and who has the complexion of a cloud and is captivating —
upon seeing one with such extreme pride,
one should display the nāga mudrā,
and with effort, a second time,
one should display the spear mudrā.
Turning completely to the left
is said to be the answer to the mudrā.
Her auspicious time is the eleventh;
at her home one inquires with the fangs.
These are the characteristics
of the lāmā of Vajravārāhī.

This concludes the nineteenth chapter of the Definitive Account of Śrī Heruka, the chapter teaching the mudrās of all the yoginīs and the answers to those mudrās.


Then, furthermore, there is more to be explained.
The signs made with the left hand —
whoever understands them
will likewise become as a sibling in truth.

Whoever shows the left hand
indicates: "Speak openly."
Whoever shows the middle finger
is answering: "Speak openly."
Whoever strikes the belly
is indicating: "I myself am hungry."
Whoever shows the forehead
means: "I have come from the sky."
Whoever puts a finger in the mouth
is saying: "I have already eaten."
Whoever moves the tongue
is saying: "I am eating."
Whoever touches the knee
is indicating: "I am tired."
Whoever touches the fingertip
is saying: "I have rested."
Whoever grinds the teeth
is indicating: "Give me food."
Whoever shows the palm
is indicating: "Do it thus."
Whoever shows a frown
is indicating: "I am bound."
Whoever shows a garuḍa gesture
is indicating: "I am free."
Whoever shows a fist —
to that one, show the palm in reply.
Having observed the changes in expression,
whoever shows the hair —
show that one the khaṭvāṅga.
Whoever moves a limb —
show that one the two fangs.
Whoever shows hand to hand
is saying: "Eat the torma."
Whoever shows the right hand
is saying: "Do it thus."
Whoever touches the ear
is indicating: "Remain in place."
Whoever touches nail to nail
is saying: "The dead are carrying you off."
Whoever draws on the ground in a maṇḍala
is saying: "Enter today."
Whoever touches the breast
is saying: "Protect my child."
Whoever inquires at the left thumb
is saying: "A lāmā's person protects me."
Whoever narrows the eyes
is saying: "Do it thus."
Whoever touches a joint
is saying: "Sleep at ease."

Whatever the messenger — woman or man —
all of these should be practiced correctly.

This concludes the twentieth chapter of the Definitive Account of Śrī Heruka, the chapter on the rite of the hand-sign code of all the yoginīs.


Then I shall explain
the view of the great secret.
Whoever touches the crown of the head —
show that one the head.
Whoever shows the forehead —
show that one the hip.
Whoever shows the teeth —
show that one the tongue.
Whoever shows the lips —

show that one the armpit.
Whoever shows the throat —
show that one the belly.
Whoever shows the arm —
show that one the shoulder.
Whoever shows the waist —
show that one the back.
Whoever shows the breast —
show that one the armpit.
Whoever shows the abdomen —
show that one the navel.
Whoever shows the secret place —
show that one the liṅga.
Whoever shows the thigh —
show that one the buttocks.
Whoever shows the knee —
show that one the shin.
Whoever shows the foot —
show that one the sole.
Whoever shows the knuckles —
show that one the fingers.
Whoever points to the ground —
show that one the sky.
Whoever shows the sky —
show that one the sun.
Whoever shows a flowing stream —
show that one the ocean.

These are undoubtedly the body mudrās of the ḍākinīs. These are always to be shown in secret, and one who shows them correctly will go far.

This concludes the twenty-first chapter of the Definitive Account of Śrī Heruka, the chapter on the rite of the defining characteristics of the limb-signs.

Then again I shall explain:
just as with the rite of the limb-signs,
whoever knows these will have no doubt
as to whether one is a brother or a sister.

Showing one finger
is saying: "Welcome."
Showing two fingers
is saying: "Welcome in return."

This is fully explained as the limb-signs of all the yoginīs.

Stretching out the left middle finger
while slightly bending the index finger —
this is to be known as the eye mudrā.
The mantra-holder shows it to that person,
and from this very moment until the end of life
that one will undoubtedly come under one's power.

Whoever shows the middle finger —
show that one the index finger.
Whoever shows the ring finger —
show that one the tongue.
Whoever shows the little finger —
show that one the lance.
Whoever shows the crown of the head —
show that one the border's edge.
Whoever shows the ground —
show that one the sky.
Whoever shows a frown —
show that one the border's edge.
Whoever shows the teeth —
show that one the lips.
Whoever shows the throat —
show that one the mouth.
Whoever shows the forehead —
show that one the eye.

These are the sequential limb-signs of all the yoginīs. These are always to be shown in secret, and those who look upon them correctly will go far.

This concludes the twenty-second chapter of the Definitive Account of Śrī Heruka, the chapter on the rite of the defining characteristics of the special signs.

Then again there is this to be explained truly:
the playful display of the ḍākinīs.
Whoever recognizes it, even from afar,
is a sister to the heroes and heroines.

Whoever possesses the sacred commitment and is attached in return
is the domain and ground of the hero's enjoyment.
Making that ground one's very foundation,
one honors the vow of the yogin.

The view of these yoginīs perceived in reverse —
the face undergoes transformation,
pleasure is constant, the eyebrows do not move,
and the various signs are quickly to be known.
Likewise, this arises from the ḍākinī.
The transformation of expression is to be known as circling;
the third mark is perfectly round.
All of this is to be known as the certain sign of the ḍākinīs.

Suddenly the expression changes completely:
the face, once as it was before, is now dissolved.
In that form, just so, just that —
whoever's presence is clear as a vajra,
whose voice is clear as the call of a cuckoo —
that suchness is supremely clear as just that.

The sign of this one in the dwelling:
together with a mirror, it resembles a vajra.
In the second form as well,
together with a mirror, it resembles a sword.
A victory banner appearing constantly like a lance —
know that the mirrors are to be placed face to face.
The forms made into signs
are to be recognized in brief summary:

Whoever possesses these characteristics
is to be known as a supreme ḍākinī.

This is the twenty-third chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, being the ritual chapter on the characteristics of the special signs and mudrās of the ḍākinīs.

Then the other speech-codes and signs
are here to be explained to the practitioner,
by which one will come to know without any doubt
whether the other is a brother or a sister.

The word potaṅgi means speaking hollowly. The word pratipoṭaṅgi means a reply to speaking hollowly. The word gamu means to say "I am going." The word lumba means to say "I am coming." The word dehaṃ means a reply to the word "city." The word catuka means to say "let us be joined." The word vīrāṇa means the heart itself. The word māraṇa means evil speech. The word kaka means a bell. The word karaṇaṅga means pig's bile. The word śravaṇa means an ear. The word amṛtanaṃ means the place of nectar. The word samāgamā means a human being. The word tālika means a ḍākinī. The word narakaṃ means a maṇḍala. The word amukaṃ means a charnel ground. The word kākhila means a door. The word śvāsanaṃ means the brahmin class. The word paridi means the royal class. The word birati means the lord class. The word krura means the common people's class. The word antasthāna means someone with a mole. The word paśullikā means a householder woman. The word bhagī means a ḍākinī. The word medaka means water. The word gṛhade means one who applies a seal. Touching the tongue to the teeth indicates "we are hungry." The word gandapasi means thirst. The word kuṭa means "I have come from a great place far away." The word kiraṇa means a flower. The word tulaṃba means laughter. The word daro means a tooth. The word nirodha means averting rain. The word tṛpti means a request. The word dhurāyu means the outside. The word dhūpabriya means a cloud. The word sānu means a mountain. The word saritā means a river. The word aṅgula means a limb. The word badana means a face. The word rājikā means the tongue. The word ādanā means a tooth. The word paṃkti means a victory banner. The word candro means a garland. The word cala means wind. The word pravāha means a boat. The word paśu means a wild animal. The word yati means a maṇḍala. The word svasaṃ means a crossroads. The word phālkuśaṃ means birth. The word mahākṣarama means great cattle. The word ga means "born there." The word nā means a human being. The word go means the best of a herd. The word ma means a buffalo. The word bha means eating. The word ha is a synonym. The word appaka means a king's man. Touching the chest means "one who dwells in the forest." Touching the mouth means "I have eaten." Touching the teeth means "I am satisfied." The word ho is a synonym, used by some. The word hrī means shame. Touching an empty space means "it is not there." Touching the thigh means "it has been destroyed by adverse forces." The upper part itself means "it is just so." The word eva means "there is nothing below."

These are the secret sign-language of the mudrās and their responses, the characteristics of the four classes, as spoken by the heroes. This is the twenty-fourth chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, being the ritual chapter on the code-words assigned as sign-language for all the characteristics of the four classes.

Then, for the fulfillment of all wishes,
the eight concealed ones are applied at the end —
for those sentient beings of lesser aspiration
who are confused and possessed of an unknowing mind.

The secret mantra clearly proclaimed by the heroes and yoginīs is as follows:

Oṃ namo bhagavate vīreśāya mahūkalpāgnisannibhāya jaṭāmakuṭotkṭāya daṃṣṭrākarālograbīṣaṇamukhāya sahasrabhujabhāsurāya paraśupāśodyataśūlakhaṭvāṃgadhāriṇe vyāghrajinaṃparadhārāya mahādhūmrāndhakāraravapuṣāya kara kara kuru kuru bandha bandha trāsaya trāsaya kṣobhaya kṣobhaya hrauṃ hrauṃ hraḥ hraḥ pheṃ pheṃ phaṭ phaṭ daha daha paca paca bhakṣa bhakṣa paśarudhirāntramālāvalambine gṛhṇa gṛhṇa saptapātālagatabhujagasarvāṃ vā tarjaya tarjaya ākaḍha ākaḍha hrīṃ hrīṃ jñauṃ jñauṃ kṣlaṃ kṣlaṃ hāṃ hāṃ.

Hīṃ hīṃ. Hūṃ hūṃ. Kili kili. Sili sili. Hili hili. Dhili dhili. Hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.

This is the twenty-fifth chapter, the secret rite of the root mantra, from the Definitive Proclamation of Glorious Heruka.

Then furthermore, in the three worlds
there is nothing that does not exist within them —
if one knows the mantra of Śrī Heruka,
all secret mantras are entirely surpassed.

Through the natural sequence and its reversal,
the messengers dwell in their true abode.
They bestow accomplishments below and above;
all my messenger women go forth.
Those messenger women grant every aim.

By seeing, and likewise by touch,
by kissing, and by perpetual embrace —
this is the special quality of the abode of the yogī.
All the gathered yogīs, however many they may be,
are said to accomplish every accomplishment.

All authentic accomplishments are to be bestowed;
at no other time and in no other way.

To the mother, the sister, the daughter,
the wife, and the messenger woman in residence —
to whoever one constantly gives the mantra,
to that very one is the rite of suchness taught.

Then within the yogī tantra,
the hard-to-find commitment I now teach.
A man goes to the left of a woman,
and thereby bestows the accomplishment of desire.

One who dwells in both home and field,
even at great distance, will come to know.

The glorious Heruka, supreme yogī —
the master is none other than the yoginī herself.
The practitioner who accomplishes within this tantra
is truly one who has become excellent.
He is not to be despised nor to be abandoned;
he is to be honored according to his ability.

The eight, beginning with the crow-faced one,
produce liberation and the growth of faith,
are the perpetual cause of all accomplishments,
and also guard the commitments.

To unite with other goddesses as well
out of delusion and at will — this is not so.
It is not non-dual nor is it unobstructed.
The practice of commitment conduct is to be practiced.

With a powerful woman, unite well.
Brahmacarya and likewise dhyāna —
practice these entirely within the hollow free of anger.
These eight constitute the practice of all commitments.

The practitioner who abides in accomplishment
should always know this.
All tantras are held in common;
do not destroy them without cause.
They are to be received through faith alone,
and not through eye or hand.

This secret is not to be shown openly,
yet one should strive diligently to teach it.
To the wise one, when the finger-snap sets things in motion,
the messenger women dwell in their true abode.

Mixed with the pure and the impure,
the practitioner abides in three modes:
the one who pleases, the thoroughly pure,
and the person endowed with the quality of illumination.

This is the twenty-sixth chapter, the thorough examination of the disciple and the rite of vows, from the Definitive Proclamation of Glorious Heruka.

Then, enacting the conduct and observance of a hero,
accomplishing all the yoginīs fully,
having come to know the distinctions of characteristics
so as to swiftly enter accomplishment —

going from village to village,
one should indicate the form of the messenger.
The messenger is like the edge of a sword,
a source of purification and the cause of merit's growth.

Likewise, by keeping excellent company with the messenger,
the practitioner attains accomplishment.
Without recitation, meditation, or offering,
one will swiftly succeed.

The practitioner, with mantra and mudrā,
excels in the practice of offering itself.
There is no other offering apart from this.

Thus, by the certain teaching of this treatise,
for those who delight in the path of the messenger,
the practitioner who strives for accomplishment,
who is fully endowed with awareness mantra and mudrā,
should always eat caru.

The practitioner, remaining in deep equanimity,
should engage with all the families.
One does not contemplate what is not to be eaten.
Through that very non-distinction,
two messenger women are to be accomplished.

When engaging in the rite of accomplishment,
it is the single messenger alone.
Self-delight and accomplishment
draw near to those who practice.

Through empowerment received in a sequence
of masters through the lineage,
one is well endowed with mantra.
This is to be correctly explained to the messengers.
One who is well joined to the mudrā, bearing the proper bearing,
is perfectly complete — one in whom gnosis (jñāna) has arisen within the continuum.

Rising early in the morning, the master of mind
performs all rites upon the body.
Weapons that transcend the limbs
are to be worn constantly upon the body.

Having purified the body,
always reciting mantra,
one clearly establishes the abiding places of yoga,
and does not tread upon the weapons.

One must not be angry with a person who holds the samaya vow.
One must not transgress through excessive effort.
With such a one, dwell in ease.
For the aim of liberation and the aim of bliss,
conduct oneself purely in the samaya.

Freed from the thought of erring delusion,
always naked throughout the night,
ever becoming dark and red,
one wears a belt made of living creatures' limbs.

Adorned at the throat with a necklace and bangles,
with shoulder ornaments,
with ear ornaments, with a cord of Brahmā,
and garlanded at the neck with a crown of skulls,
a tinkling waist-band sounding as it rings,
a crown of matted locks hung with silk,
adorned with artificial hair and the rest,
together with vajra, skull-cup, and khaṭvāṅga —
one beats the ḍamaru and sounds the syllable Hūṃ.

All heroes and heroines
are adorned with the three armors.
For the sake of bliss, bliss is to be aroused.
For the purpose of offering, attachment is fully abandoned.
Abiding in the pure dwelling of glorious Heruka,
fully endowed with the five mudrās,
the accomplished one strives for siddhi.

Adorned at the throat with necklace and bangles, with ear ornaments,
and at the crown of the head with jewels arrayed fully,
the offerings of attachment and ashes
are present throughout all times.

By night it is always to be made manifest,
by day it is to be kept in total secrecy.
The wisdom of discrimination is kept thoroughly hidden.
Utterly peaceful, fatigue is calmed.

The pure dwelling is to be understood as threefold.
One abides in accordance with one's own continuum.
One does not regard with partiality those of one's own family or of another.
The binding of the crown of the head and the rest is abandoned.

The messenger: the pure dwelling is the first.
The second is held to be peacefulness.
Eating a single meal — that alone —
is declared to be the third pure dwelling.

The yogin always preserves
these pure dwellings constantly.
If one attains the sequence of purity and cleanliness,
there is no siddhis that will not arise.

What is taught in the abridged version of that very teaching,
likewise what is taught in the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra,
is correctly explained in the Secret Tantra,
as likewise in the glorious Paramādya
and in the Vajrabhairava Tantra —
recitation and vows and the rest are accomplished there.
Here, by meditative concentration alone,
the mantra-holder accomplishes in an instant.

By those who delight in the path of yoga,
this is declared to be the conduct of the pure dwelling.
As for the merit that accrues from the pure dwelling,
it is not fitting for anyone to be able to speak of it fully.
The vast qualities of the accomplished one —
can some speak of them with a single mouth?
What can be expressed with a single face?
Even one with a hundred thousand faces could not tell it.

The glorious Heruka's great gnosis,
all the defining marks of complete purity —
the stream of bliss of the accomplished one,
non-dual, devoid of duality —
contact through non-dual union
purifies and destroys all evil.
Even through mere touch and speech,
one becomes fully liberated from all evil.

The supreme person, performing all conduct
in a body that is pure and without fault —
all evils are completely purified
and the ground of the Tathāgata is attained.

All evils are completely purified,
the lineage of the Tathāgata is born,
and one becomes a king endowed with the Dharma.

Thus, having always made offerings,
one presents the ritual cake with devotion.
The yogin, in accordance with one's own wish and activity,
gives them according to the proper rite.

On the tenth day of the waning moon,
and on whatever day of the waxing moon occurs,
offerings are to be made with swift and earnest effort.
With the intoxicating meats of Vajravārāhī,
a devoted person having made those offerings,
the glorious Heruka, having become manifestly pleased,
with a joyful heart will grant the supreme —
and those are the highest practical precepts.

The vow-holder's ritual cake by night
is given with hair loosened and body naked.
Through that union, in the very identity of glorious Heruka,
the Mātṛkā goddesses will be delighted.

This concludes the twenty-seventh chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, being the chapter on conduct, vows, offerings, and the ritual of the torma.

Whatever one offers as a pure and excellent offering in actuality,
a hero (sattva) emerging from nirvāṇa —
through that very offering of oneself,
all buddhas and the rest are thereby honored.

All heroes and yoginīs,
the stable as forerunners and the moving,
gathered in peace and dwelling excellently —
the brothers and heroes are to be honored.

Together with brothers, sons, and companions,
let all pleasure and suffering arise together.
Mantras and mudrās themselves,
and that wisdom, are not to be revealed.

Purifying foods are to be eaten.
Always having practiced the samaya vow,
even to one's own mantra-siblings, they are not to be given away.
The oral instructions are not to be given to the degenerate.

To one who abides in the samayas, according to what is appropriate,
the oral instructions likewise are to be given.
Other than to a messenger, one does not go to others
blinded by desire.

Toward the messenger, ever-devoted liberation
is to be enjoyed even in passing.
Even to those of lower birth and the other kind,
respectful attendance is not to be performed.

Mother, sister, daughter,
wife, and female messenger — abiding in these,
austerities will assuredly be exhausted.
To one who has accomplished the wheel or its equivalent,
the supreme is to be invoked together.

Thus the substances are definitively established.
In the world, always conduct is from the left:
place the left foot first,
employ the left hand in full,
perform offerings excellently with left conduct.
With the left, simply embrace;
with the left, make offerings and eat.

With the vow unimpaired, the vow is complete.
The practitioner strives diligently in activity.
Conducting oneself within one's family of the samaya,
one practices together, eating the same food.

Conducting oneself throughout the five families,
one is to examine carefully according to the four families.
Conducting oneself throughout a single family,
one honors the accomplished yogin supremely.

With beef and horsemeat,
with dog-meat and bird-meat,
having made a triangular maṇḍala,
even the buddhas will assuredly be dissolved.

Endowed with mudrā and mantra perfectly —
just so is that food of the heroes.
This is the emanation of glorious Heruka.
All treatises on conventional conduct are abandoned.

Apprehending things as permanent,
guarding all activities,
and accomplishing things as they are without obstruction —
this will not be accomplished here in any place.

The supreme excellent female messenger of that one
is ever present, striving together.
Through the excellent application of attraction throughout,
comes the discernment of yogic substances.

Being devoted to the guru's oral instructions
is equal to giving the wealth of meaning.

This concludes the twenty-eighth chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, being the chapter on the inner fire offering and the rite of acting within a single family.

Then, furthermore, what is taught:
the characteristics of the messenger are to be known —
through which one comes to understand correctly,
abiding in the samaya of the ḍākinī.

A maternal uncle, a father, and
an owner — seen in an instant.
Thick-tongued, eyes red and yellow,
rough, with red and yellow hair.

Always delighting in the common accomplishments (sāmānya-siddhi) of every kind,
in recitation and vows always glad,
endowed with mindfulness and perfect awareness —
messengers and the like, together with their rank.

The twenty-four supreme excellent ḍākinīs
bestow the supreme fruit of conduct and liberation.
Constantly recite the root mantra —
it accomplishes all desired aims,
thoroughly pacifies all māras,
and bestows the supreme fruit of yogic sport
upon the three worlds of the animate and inanimate.
This arises from this secret mantra.

Perfectly endowed with mantra and mudrā,
the practitioner strives earnestly for accomplishment.
A secret mantra divorced from mudrā
will not succeed for those with bodies.

As long as there are activities of warmth,
one is to understand them through earnest endeavor.
Whoever is hostile to the great yoga
that accomplishes all desired aims
will be born a hundred times in the birthplace of dogs.

will be born in the birthplace of the spotted ones.

For example, just as one who desires butter
may churn water with great effort,
butter will never appear from that:
it merely exhausts the body with toil.

One who grasps and venerates
what has become a cause for livelihood,
relying on another yoga for that purpose,
will likewise find it purposeless in the end.

The hero who is the great, supreme yogi,
wherever he abides in any region —
even if that land belongs to low-born barbarians —
that region is to be regarded with full attention.
As the cause for embracing all sentient beings,
there I always dwell.

This concludes chapter twenty-nine, from the Definitive Exposition of Śrī Heruka, the chapter on the characteristics of the messenger and the ritual of occasions of capacity.


Then furthermore, what is to be explained —
the utterly rare and wondrous thing
by which one accomplishes accomplishment swiftly
through mere knowledge of it alone.

A portion of earth, level and pleasing,
is to be anointed closely with sandalwood.
Upon the fragrant, sweet-scented ground,
scatter and spread fine flower petals,
arrange a proper garland of butter-lamps,
and with the fragrance of incense make it delightful.
Having done all of this,
bind the directions,
then bind the clay drum.
Draw a fully rounded poisonous design.
Write the letters of the outer syllables evenly,
and place it in perfect equipoise.

The hero, abiding there,
gathers the accomplishment of all desired aims.
Through proceeding in order and reversing,
the practitioner accomplishes vowels and letters.
Entering into those numbers,
having been made virtuous by the Sage,
take the thirty-second cell,
distinguish it by the fifth.
Take exactly the fifty,
divide by the twenty-fourth.
Take the thirty-sixth cell,
divide it by the third.
Then take the thirty-second,
distinguish it by the fifth.
Then take the twenty-fifth,
join it with the twenty-fourth.
Take the thirty-third exactly,
possessed of the fifteenth cell.
Together with the fifths,
it is held to be the supreme beautiful one.
Endowed with the twenty-second,
it is marked by the eleventh.
It is held to be the first word.
Take the nineteenth cell,
joined exactly with the fire-child,
divided by the third cell.
The seed of the eighth mixed set,
together with the thirty-sixth cell,
becomes the syllable fully joined.
Again, those very words
accomplish all desired aims.
Then, taking the self-arisen,
join it as the fifth from the cell.
Place the bindu of nāda at the crown —
this is declared to be the second word,
known as "accomplishing all aims."
In the nineteenth cell itself,
divide by the twenty-seventh,
joined exactly with the thirds.
Take the thirty-third properly,
and join it as the second of the cells.
Joined exactly with the twentieth,
it is held to be the supreme beautiful one.
Likewise the twenty-first itself,
likewise the twenty-sixth —
as the word recited twice,
place it in perfect equipoise and gather it.
Then take it by reversing the sequence.
From the first of the cells,
joined exactly with the end of the fourth,
and likewise with the fifteenth —
this is declared to be the third word,
of Dharma, meaning, desire, and liberation.
The seed of the second cell,
the thirty-sixth cell itself,
likewise the twenty-sixth,
take the thirty-third exactly.
Possessed of the thirteenth cell,
from the tenth cell itself,
the practitioner takes it with sequence reversed.
The nineteenth cell,
the twenty-third cell —
joined exactly as the second cell,
adorned above with the bindu.
Then seize the lord of earth,
and the eighth likewise,
distinguished by the fire-child.
Purified at the border with the syllable hūṃ —
this is what is called "Conqueror of the Three Realms,"
adorned by the four mantra-words.

Oṃ is what illuminates all.
Hūṃ and phaṭ are joined at the end.
This mantra is the Wheel-Turning Vidyārāja —
what has never arisen will not arise from this.

In the Condensed form of that same one, and in the Glorious Supreme,
in Cakrasaṃvara and Vajrabhairava,
possessed of the four wrathful ones and of the perfect,
in an instant one becomes the eight bodies.

For the sake of protecting the maṇḍala of bliss,
surpass all that is harmful.
Even by merely obtaining this,
without need of examination, one will pass beyond death.

The lord of the maṇḍala-union should recite it personally —
it is that which brings forth the fruit of all accomplishments.

Oṃ sumbha ni sumbha hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇāpaya hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ ānaya hoḥ bhagavaṃ vidyārāja hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.

This is the thirtieth chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka — the chapter on the collection of mantras for binding with drum-pegs.

Then, of all the great flesh,
the Vajra Born of Terror is taught.
This is said to be the unbearable terrifier
of all that is harmful.

In the activities of wrathful rites,
using dog flesh and pig flesh
and likewise the crested copper one,
one should perform eating, fire-offering, and torma.
Perform the rite without exception.
All without remainder is accomplished without remainder,
and all royal dominions are thoroughly accomplished.

From the three substances of conch, fish-tail, and pearl,
who would denigrate
the skull of one who embodies the dharmakāya?

The hero adorned with a garland of skulls,
ornamented by the half-moon —
one who has become exactly such in form
is said to be the Lord of Heroes.

The five signs that are shown
are on the left hand of the practitioner.
This is the seat of the hero —
it is the great entrance to the signs.

All that moves and does not move in the three realms,
and all wandering beings, arise from the left.
Vajrasattva resides on the thumb,
and on the index finger likewise Vairocana.
In the form of armor thus,
Padma performs the dance as the chief —
the hero who bestows all accomplishments
when they are displayed is present.

On the little finger resides Ākāśagarbha,
possessed of the inexhaustible body.
On the surface of the nail,
Hayagrīva is said to reside.
All of these heroes
arise from the left as their source.

On the palm of the hand is the assembly of
Śrī Heruka's Vajravārāhī, which brings joy.
Having firmly established it behind,
one should display the five selves.
Setting these upon the hand
gathers all that is beloved.
Through a rite of that very form,
the supreme heroes should be worshipped.

Earth is said to be called the Eye-One.
The water element is spoken of as Māmakī.
Fire is taught as the White-Robed One.
Wind is supremely proclaimed as Tārā.
Tsumbiā is emptiness itself —
it is likewise the perfection.
In the center is the abode of all heroes;
the wise should request that one depart behind.

This secret should not be told —
one should strive and conceal it.
In this way, having made the signs, the heroes
should together proceed to the feast.
The union of all heroes together
is the supreme bliss of the web of ḍākinīs.

This is the thirty-first chapter of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka — the chapter on the rite of hand-signs for eating, fire-offering, and torma activities.

Then, further, what remains to be taught —
the gathering of feast and banquet,
by the correct rite whereby
accomplishments are swiftly and thoroughly entered.

The summoning of animals:
by this sequence previously taught, the practitioner
summons animals, and likewise the five —
donkey, frog, female human drum,
jackal, horse, and the like —
into the maṇḍala for accomplishing accomplishments.
These animals are the subsidiary limbs of accomplishment.

Of all species, the supreme species is cattle.
Among four-legged ones, the elephant is proclaimed supreme.
Among those with wings, the goose itself.
Among animals, the beast of burden.
Among gods, that which moves its lips.
In this way it is proclaimed:
into the maṇḍala for accomplishing accomplishments —

These animals are explained in detail. Crow, water turtle, jackal,
twice-born (brahmin), great minister,
crane, the laughing one, and kadamba —
through consuming these, through burnt offering, and through torma,
one's desires are accomplished.

The porridge made from the milk of a black female dog,
combined with the dark fruit of the māśa bean —
for the sake of one's desires, without hesitation,
one should perform the burnt offering at a corpse's mouth,
up to one hundred and eight times in all.
Then a hungry ghost (preta) rises up
and questions the practitioner,
saying: "What do you wish?"
From underground it bestows a sword,
or the power to sever and to benefit,
or pills, eye medicines, or treasures,
or swift-footedness, or the taking of essences.
Having given this very thing just once,
it departs — it does not remain elsewhere.
Above and below, the messenger is accomplished.
In this tantra there is no doubt about this.

Cattle dung and floating matter —
the dried remainder, then the root —
these are to be made into the form of great bliss.
Or alternatively it may be that of the turtle.
This grants the accomplishments.

The one with four hands and four faces,
as long as one performs the hundred-thousand-fold mudrā offering —
a great wrathful one whose body is white,
thereafter bearing a ferocious form,
gazing upon Vajravārāhī,
bearing her colors and her weapon,
a hero adorned with a garland of skulls,
his body smeared with ash nearby,
crowned with matted locks and tied with knots,
his body ornamented with mudrās,
his fangs slightly bared at the mouth —
making the great preta his seat,
the practitioner should always, at all times,
knowing that mantra, meditate upon it.
By these distinguished and exceptional qualities,
the desired accomplishments will be obtained.

This concludes the thirty-second chapter of the Śrī Heruka's Definitive Exposition: the chapter on the ritual of accomplishing animals, livestock, and animated corpses, together with the rite of the generation stage.

Then, for the supreme practitioner of all,
there is nothing withheld from any preparatory practice.
Food and dwelling, fish, flesh, and the like —
one performs these as one is able.
Even when they are unavailable, the act of eating
is to be performed as the fivefold unity.
Food and dwelling in abundance
are always to be carried out at night.
Then the messenger is freely bestowed,
and in particular the practitioner,
placing the head upon one's own lap,
honors the non-dual hero with the highest veneration.
Whether it is a mother, or a sister,
or a daughter, or a wife-consort —
through a ritual of this very kind,
one is perfectly liberated from bondage.
Then this mantra is accomplished
for as long as the elements continue to exist.

The master remains well-settled in the body
and receives offering from the practitioner.
The seats of the heroes,
and the mudrās themselves — of this there is no doubt.
The practitioner, in profoundly even equipoise,
performs song, dance, and the like.
For as long as all embodied beings
have not grown attached to yogic gnosis,
for that long they will revolve in cyclic existence
and be distracted by suffering and sorrow.
Through all material things the practitioner
then makes offering to the mudrā.
One who desires to make offering with offering —
through contempt, one is certainly burned.
In the tantra of yoga, among human beings,
the first of the great seals (mahāmudrā) is accomplished.
One should make offering with intense endeavor.
Thereafter the heroes
are to be engaged as heroes themselves.
Having made offering in this way,
the one who rises from underground —
the peaceful, the enriching,
the empowering and the magnetizing,
the slaying and the expelling and the like,
the stupefying and the inflating likewise,
the separating and the severing —
the accomplishments of the rites are to be offered.
Whatever rites are to be performed,
they are accomplished free from affliction.
Without any doubt, all the accomplishments
of the practitioner are fulfilled.

This concludes the thirty-third chapter of the Śrī Heruka's Definitive Exposition: the chapter on secret offering and the offering of respectful attendance.

Then, the expanded ritual known as the Net of Ḍākinīs —
whatever activity one undertakes, the practitioner
swiftly accomplishes it without doubt.
All heroes and yoginīs —

it is to be placed at the center of the lotus,
and it is to be inserted at the point between the eyebrows.
Likewise at the station of the avadhūtī —
having been made the hero's overflow and desire,
then the food too is to be burned from there.
Gomāṃsa and blood —
with effort, the five things to be burned are to be prepared.
Then, into the blazing oblation fire,
nine pourings of burnt offerings are to be given.
One should gaze upon the ocean of blazing garlands.
From all sides it is the wheel of the gates itself.
The hero's sovereign with four faces —
likewise, the abode of heroes and yoginīs:
on the petals are four female messenger-spirits.
Non-dual bliss with all the heroes —
in accordance with the rite, by way of its aspects,
Khaṇḍaroha on the outer side,
having entered in one's own form,
is to be beheld at the center of the wheel.
These wheels are to be made vivid and clear
in due sequential order.
The activity of the ocean of vidyā (gnosis) is likewise —
it has been taught in brief summary.
The master of the non-dual union with the messengers —
in this there is no doubt that accomplishment will arise.

This concludes the thirty-fourth chapter of the Śrī Heruka's Definitive Exposition: the chapter on the homa of the messengers and the ritual of activity.

Then, the supreme excellence of activities
is illustrated in due sequential order.
The master of the offering of non-dual union —
the activities are to be applied individually.
The mantras that bring about supreme accomplishment —
their classifications are taught in sequence.
Whatever mantras of color, of messengers, and the rest —
they revolve completely with the force of an arrow.
The hero, bound together by mutual knotting of cords,
is separated by the very act of objectification.
Then, taking up by means of a garland of seeds —
the syllable HŪṂ abides at the extremity.
That which has become the hindrance to what is to be accomplished —
it will not move so much as a single step.
Having joined them together in coupling,
and being bound by the vajra chain of succession,
the separation that is of the nature of vajra —
likewise one should circle around it as a bee.
Drawing in by means of the iron hook,
and striking with the wooden peg likewise —
it is taught that one strikes with the vajra itself.
An arrow is to be applied to the breath,
and for averting untimely death
a limb is to be joined together with the khaṭvāṅga.
Into the skull-bowl vessel
a weapon is definitely to be applied at the mouth.

This concludes the thirty-fifth chapter of the Śrī Heruka's Definitive Exposition: the chapter on non-dual activity and the rite of averting untimely death.

Then, the great mudrā offering
and the celebrated display of mantra —
for swiftly bringing about accomplishments,
this mudrā offering is beyond doubt.
Having applied mantra to both emblems,
the non-duality of ḍākinī and hero —
by means of the heart-essences likewise,
the mantrin applies them to the ḍākinī.
The intelligent one is to anoint the ḍākinī.
One who desires the pure body —
having made the offering to the hero,
the activity is to be carried out with effort.
In the various categories, as the mantrin pleases,
the mantra is definitely to be applied in reversed fashion.
For the aims of cutting off and benefiting,
one visualizes it as the substance of activity.
Having distinguished that suchness itself,
it is to be applied along the channel-path.
For the purpose of union in supreme accomplishment —
as it is externally, so it is internally likewise.
By this, swiftly, gods
and, together with asuras and humans, one is to accomplish.

This concludes the thirty-sixth chapter of the Śrī Heruka's Definitive Exposition: the chapter on the offering of suchness and the ritual of activity.

Then, there is yet more to be taught:
the rite for subduing forms.
The secret mantra applied mutually —
it is to be joined together with the ḍākinī.
Having swallowed food and drink without digesting,
at the conclusion of recitation one is to vomit.
After seven nights are completed,
it is to be applied to food and drink.
By this, for as long as one lives,
without doubt that person will come under one's power.
Having drunk butter of a yellow-red hue,
at the conclusion of recitation one is to vomit.
If with that one anoints one's own face,
then even one who is perpetually wrathful —
by merely seeing one, will come under one's power.
Sesame oil, with cooked rice attached to it,
together with these, having anointed one's body,
and having applied the oil with a mantra by the mantrin,
it is then to be fully applied to food.
If this activity is not abandoned,
for as long as one lives one will perpetually hold power.

Having eaten black sesame, one then vomits together with thorns, and the vomit is endowed with the excretion of costus root. The worms born in the stomach from this activity — these one binds with one's own blood and then combines with one's own semen. This is thoroughly applied as an anointing to food and drink, eye-medicine, and clothing. By this, for as long as one lives, without doubt one will come under one's power.

When the fire-offering of burned beef is anointed with blood, the gods will immediately come under one's power, or else one who has not yet come will die. The skilled practitioner is to visualize and then perform the fire-offering in the presence of that very deity. At the conclusion of the fire-offering, one is to make a torma offering. The beings of the three realms are summoned in a single instant; it will be accomplished within seven nights.

The defining mark of conduct for one who holds the sacred pledge — rare to find in the three worlds — is this: by always keeping one's own mantra concealed, one must strive and maintain secrecy. The hidden meaning will not be found, nor will it be accomplished by one of inferior fortune. Yet even a practitioner of little merit, by pleasing me, will attain it.

From the Definitive Proclamation of the Glorious Heruka, this is the thirty-seventh chapter: the ritual chapter on bringing the inner self under one's power.

Now then — the signs of a ḍākinī's body and the distinctions among the limbs of the hero: whoever has accomplished these signs will accomplish their aim. One must not inquire of a master of heroes, and in every respect one is to keep this concealed; one must not disclose it to anyone. If a practitioner who engages in left-handed conduct recites the secret-mark mantras of the ḍākinīs carelessly, I shall not look upon that one: many thousands of ḍākinīs will devour that one of wicked nature. One who destroys the sacred pledge, who acts wickedly — who has no doubt in killing a brahmin — that being of sinful conduct, that deluded and deceived wicked one: even when devoured by the ḍākinīs, I shall not protect such a person. Among those who hold secrets, such a practitioner is like cattle. One who violates the sacred pledge of the guru has fallen from the buddhas and from the world.

Whoever guards the tantra of the Glorious Heruka — hard to behold — I shall hold that one in my care, calling them a virtuous renunciant together with the ḍākinīs. The practitioner who attends and honors the guru, who acts with sincerity, who always delights in the ḍākinīs — for that one, accomplishment will arise. The practitioner will become a hero. The master of wandering through the sky of the three realms — the practitioner who aspires to be a hero — will be worshipped everywhere. That one enters excellently into yoga and will also come to know true giving. If one who holds the discipline of Heruka sees a master who is a hero, seeing and seeing, one rejoices completely.

The practitioner is to recite with these mantras the supreme root-secret mantra of the hero seven times, opening it with the excellent mantra HŪṂ and so forth. If one strives and makes offerings with these, one makes offering to all the buddhas and the rest. Without any doubt, one will perpetually sport together with the great hero.

Dwelling in that one's heart is Vārāhī — I, together with the heroes, the yoginīs, and the messengers. Whoever is well-born together with that one is a sentient being of merit, one who beholds.

Along riverbanks, ocean shores, mountains, crossroads, marshes, wells, lakes, empty houses, and alleyways — in all these places the ḍākinīs dwell, gazing with constant attachment. In great and terrifying charnel grounds, in the sky-realm, likewise underground, and many risen corpses — with fearsome forms and immense power, great heroes sport freely together with them.

In mountain ravines, dense forests, and secret places, yoginīs, secret persons —

— in all those various directions the sādhaka sports upon the earth.

This concludes Chapter Thirty-Eight from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, the chapter on the ritual of the yoginī sādhana sites and the secret heroes' abodes.

Then the great accomplished yogin
roars with the eight forms of mantra.
Beholding this truly in such a place,
he will undoubtedly be supplicated.

Many and various sounds of terror,
unbearable ḍākinīs who inspire dread —
should a hero become afraid,
he trembles and utterly flees.

But if the hero remains fearless,
they seize him by the left hand
and carry him to their own abode,
where those ḍākinīs
sport with him constantly and openly;
he will travel to the land of bliss.

With reverent longing for Glorious Heruka,
they carry him to the realm of those who move through the sky.
The sādhaka, whose body is mantra,
knows neither death nor aging in saṃsāra.

This concludes Chapter Thirty-Nine from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, the chapter on the ritual of beholding and laughing with the cry Ha-ha.

Now it shall be fully explained
by what means one gains mastery over the earth.
Through the hero's mantra moon,
by abiding in the yoga ritual, accomplishment is won.

With a lamp that induces intoxication
and furnished with fish flesh,
in the place of the hero's power, at all times,
the sādhaka should devote himself to fire offerings at night,
for seven days' duration —
vast siddhis (accomplishments) will be bestowed.

Performing the practice in three sessions,
endowed with the one hundred and eight,
a king together with his army
will come under one's power within seven days.

Half of that number subdues a heroic minister;
with half of that, a vassal king —
thirty-two fire offerings, performed in sequence.
With twenty, a brahmin is subdued
through a seven-day fire offering.
Likewise for the warrior caste, seven.
Five fire offerings for the lord's caste.
Three fire offerings for the commoner caste.
One fire offering for the lowest.

Thus the hero, proceeding through the castes in order,
correctly practices for one full month.
By the power of mantra, the sādhaka
draws all beings under his influence.

The hero, by means of the earlier ritual,
if he pursues it with desire, will obtain it.
He becomes like a lord of desire upon the earth,
glorious, possessed of excellent fortune.
The sādhaka will undoubtedly
become pleasing to the ḍākinīs.

This concludes Chapter Forty from the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, the chapter on the ritual of bringing the five castes under power and relying upon the great seal (mahāmudrā).

Now the supreme excellence of action —
whoever knows this, as sādhaka,
may accomplish: enchantment, summoning, separation,
killing, banishing, and the like,
stupefying and maddening,
bewildering, and likewise striking with a stake,
causing loss of speech and rendering mute,
blinding, and likewise deafening,
causing one to become a eunuch,
and utterly transforming a body —
these twelve great actions
are to be accomplished always by the sādhaka.

For the sādhaka who achieves the siddhi,
mindfulness will undoubtedly be perfected.

All places, beginning with those of the guru,
are pervaded entirely by the ḍākinīs.
Their self-arisen abodes, rich in gnosis,
arise manifestly in land after land.
The vajra maṇḍala's mistresses are these —
they are spoken of as ḍākinīs.

Kulūṭa and the hermitages,
the land of Sindhu and the sovereign city,
the golden isle and Saurāṣṭra,
and likewise the divine abodes,
the preta village and the snow-land abodes,
Kāñcī, or the land of Lambāka,
Kaliṅga and Kośala,
Triśakune, Oṭra,
Kāmarūpa, Mālava,
the goddess's fortress and the realm of Rāma,
Godāvarī, Arbuda,
Oḍḍiyāna, Jālandhara,
Pullīra, Malaya, and others —

Whatever woman is born in these lands,
a non-dual heroine and yoginī —

All of these are endowed with desirable forms, and through the force of mind they enter in. In Kulūṭa there are six yoginīs; in the land of Myāngam are the mamos; in the land of Sindhu are the lāmas; in Nāgara are the mistresses of the lineage; in Lambāka and Saurāṣṭra are the goddesses of the lineage. In the preta village and the great forest, along with the ḍākinī Rūpikā; on the snow mountains and in Kāñcī, those spoken of as mothers with children; in the lands of Pāñcāla, the household goddesses; in Kaliṅga, those who hold to discipline and vows. In Kośala, the flesh-eaters; likewise in the preta village, the mighty and powerful vajra ḍākinī; in Triśakune, the one born of dismemberment; likewise in Pullīra and Malaya; on the golden mountain, the one born of the lineage who bears the mark of a mole. Twenty-one thousand women, and however many others there are beyond that — these are all yoginīs of the wheel of the glorious Heruka. They are the great union with glorious Heruka, and they are the chief mistresses of his maṇḍala. Through these twenty-four ḍākinīs, the three worlds of the moving and the unmoving, and all beings without exception, are pervaded. This is the samaya of the ḍākinīs: it is precisely the cultivation of emanation. Whatever it may be — meditative concentration and the rest — all will be brought to completion upon this earth. Through the conduct of the left, naked, and by always maintaining meditative equipoise at night, whether male or in every case left-handed, all yoginīs and heroes proceed. By the worship of mudrā dance, by constantly venerating the self-arisen, without exception and without remainder all are accomplished, and one enters supremely into the worship of the left.

This is the forty-first chapter of the Definitive Explanation of Glorious Heruka: the ritual chapter on establishing the maṇḍala of twenty-four syllables.

Then the hero, having drunk the flower-water, should recollect this mantra. One who accomplishes the mudrā together, always acting in this way, should always eat flesh at night, and by praising with this very mantra three times, one will quickly attain bliss. One who drinks, likewise gives, and upon touching and resting there — O great mistress — by truth, by the conduct of brahmic life, and by the mudrā of laughter at the beginning and end, one who possesses the sharp pride of gazing: at night and likewise in the day, by this one is to perform acts of laughter. As for whatever are the secrets of form and action — listen, O hero. Ever from that one tears arise; from faith, one's hair stands on end. One should not tread upon the vajra. Likewise, naked worship: the very sequence of the assemblage of mudrās of all the lords of desire. Through the wondrous dance of arousal, incitement, laughter, and coquetry — whatever diverse things are brought to the fore — one should recollect the mudrā and mantra. The eightfold laughter of hā hā hē hē; the lord of diversity supremely rejoices. Uttering hā hā, tears constantly arise from that; by that very fact one becomes joyful to that one, and the mantra of meditative concentration is excellently applied. The mistresses and heroes, together with the arising of the hair, are in bliss. Not treading upon the vajra is to be examined completely by the left.

This is the forty-second chapter of the Definitive Explanation of Glorious Heruka: the ritual chapter on the mantra of laughter and the magical illusion of the ḍākinīs' forms.

Then Avalokiteśvara spoke: "The hero and the non-dual person who knows the ritual distinctions of the sacred abodes delights constantly in cultivation. At the crossroads, the sūtra-way, or in houses, at the abode of the hero or on a mountain — ḍākinīs abiding in their samaya will behold one even from afar. By naked worship with the mudrā, one attains the supreme rank by one's own hand. Whether covered by mere clothing or otherwise, those of desire will not be clothed. Likewise, with loosened hair as the foremost mark, all activities are to be undertaken."

Perform worship with the root mantra and likewise with others, binding the directions, so that even gods and their hosts do not see. Fill the hands with flowers, move through space, and scatter them upward. If those flowers do not fall and are not seen to touch the ground, one will gain mastery over sacred abodes distinguished by their excellence, and over thousands of beings who traverse the sky. One will summon the mistresses of speech (ḍākinīs of mantric power) and come to know the speech of gods and the speech of gods in due order. One will come to know the courses of the stars.

In villages, hamlets, and likewise in wildernesses, in cities and at crossroads, by a solitary tree and in the abode of the hero, on a mountaintop and by night, if one constantly recalls the essence or the near-essence, one will not be seen by gods or men. Therefore in all these regions and directions the practitioner always abides.

Visualizing red in color at the tip of a tree, with the nature of the seven syllables, one meditates on it falling swiftly without division — and the grounds too become other than they were. Arranging it upon one's own body, one lies down on a kusha-grass mat upon the ground. Reciting the seven-syllable self-mantra one hundred and eight times, all activities that are desired in the mind will be shown in dreams. Untimely death, defeat, and decline, whatever arises in all activities, and many other varied appearances — all of these are shown in dreams without doubt.

Likewise, by reciting the mantra over a sword, water, the thumb, a lamp, or a mirror, the mantra-practitioner who is himself always a yogin causes the vision of divination to descend. Having meditated and recited seven times, virtuous and non-virtuous actions will be revealed.

Then, with the seven syllables of the hero, setting out the mantra according to its divisions, visualizing it in the midst of the sun, one recites it up to one thousand times. One shows it, like a form of crystal, to one afflicted by illness. The very moment it is seen, there is no doubt that all illnesses will be destroyed.

For one to be liberated from illness, it is like the moon of autumn. Arranging one's display in the midst of the moon, with a wheel in the left hand, the syllables appearing like the color of crystal, one applies this to all illnesses. Epidemic, possession, forgetfulness, all manner of stabbing pains, leprosy, those seized by poison, and all illnesses without exception — visualizing the moon-form syllables, one disperses them in all ten directions.

At night, abiding in the secret, one applies cow dung and the three sweets. Knowing the seven-syllable secret mantra, one performs an oblation offering eight thousand times. By dawn, at the proper time, one will obtain a thousand gold srangs. By ten thousand oblation offerings, one will obtain an excellent regional territory.

Or alternatively, wherever one meditates on the location of this king of secret mantras, it is beyond doubt that one will be born in that very place at that very time.

With white, pacification is accomplished. With black, one kills in mere moments. With red, one comes under control and is immediately summoned with certainty. With yellow, all are subdued — this is the definitive teaching of the treatise. With yellow one subdues armies, and conquers boats, machines, and elephants. By merely visualizing white, death is certainly aroused. One seized by a hundred great serpents — that too is swiftly aroused. Seeing those who have fallen unconscious from poison, by fully waking them they are awakened. Epidemic, possession, and forgetfulness, upon seeing the hand, are filled with fear. If one clenches the fist in battle and constantly recites the mantra in the mind, for as long as the fist is not opened, all activities will be accomplished. If an enemy raises a weapon in hand, for as long as the fist is not opened, he will not be able to release the weapon. All other activities are likewise accomplished in the same way.

As for fruits, flowers, leaves, tree sap, and likewise foods —

The first application is of the body. The second, likewise, is of potency. The third is of speech itself. The fourth will not become an object of perception. Through the king of mantras, accomplishment will come. For the earth together with its trees, and the ocean bound with a cord — here there is no doubt that accomplishment will come. Throughout the three realms, from that which moves to that which does not move, it is able to curse and to confer benefit. This is the forty-third chapter, the rite of activity for the near-essence, from the Definitive Exposition of the Glorious Heruka.

Then, relying upon a messenger bearing the seven syllables, wherever an activity is properly undertaken, in that very moment it is swiftly accomplished. Through the rite of the seven syllables, six yoginīs are arrayed. Six who are well established in the wheel — in the rite of that very form, with the left side as the prompt, whoever mentally holds the apprehended and apprehender, let them repeat the king of secret mantras aloud. To whomever that hand is shown, that person will certainly be summoned.

Red sandalwood powder, likewise cattle urine and salt — these are mixed together with the footprint of the one to be subjugated and examined as one. Rubbing together with both hands, perform a fire offering to the yoginī. At night, at a fire with smouldering embers, or at a cremation-ground fire, burn the powder. Facing toward the one to be subjugated, this application is to be undertaken. For as long as one recites up to one hundred times, that person will certainly be summoned. The one to be subjugated, along with their wealth and people, will come under one's power. This application is the accomplishment; otherwise, I do not speak. Taking that very powder and mixing it thoroughly with iron filings, wrapping it in cremation-ground cloth and reciting seven times, dig the earth at a crossroads to a depth of about eight finger-widths, and with the name of the enemy included — whoever's name is spoken and hidden there, that one will swiftly be crushed.

Taking that very powder after reciting, and restoring it diligently with cattle's milk — if it is revived in that way, there is no doubt that accomplishment will be complete. Taking that very powder and combining it with the five intoxicants, binding it with cremation-ground cloth, and writing the enemy's name as well — having recited one hundred times, if it is concealed in a cremation-ground, the one to be subjugated will go mad. By removing it, they will be freed. After removing it, diligently wash it likewise with cattle's milk. Reviving them once more — there is no doubt this will be accomplished. This is the forty-fourth chapter, the rite of activity of the seven syllables of the six yoginīs, from the Definitive Exposition of the Glorious Heruka.

Then, the supreme excellence of activities is that which produces the siddhi of speech. Taking one hundred and eight red flowers of the oleander (karavīra), and with cattle's milk, one is to recite one hundred times as well. With each recitation, press a flower onto the crown of the liṅga. Dwelling thus in profound equipoise, this is to be done for seven days. Then, on the eleventh day, having taken up the flowers and going to a great river, cast them into the water one by one, reciting once for each in succession. When the last flower in the river is carried back upstream against the current and floats down, if one takes it together with the water and drinks it without touching it with bare hands, the words of the sādhana drawn from the secret tantra will be accomplished.

Then, binding one hundred wombs and reciting one hundred and eight times, when the mantra-practitioner faces toward the one to be subjugated, he remains in the belly of the one to be subjugated. In accordance with the mental abiding toward them, the wise one moves the little finger at three sessions. Even for the killing of brahmin priests, summoning through seven hundred days of offerings and so forth is certain. From red sandalwood powder —

Make an image of the one to be subjugated. Anoint its body with the three heating substances, and thoroughly smear it with monkey fat as well. Then, in the practitioner's secret place, pierce it with a copper needle and, with unwearying acacia-wood fire, the wise one heats it for seven days. Reciting one hundred times, and at the end of the recitation, summon before you the lord of people along with his retinue of queens — they will certainly be drawn forth.

Write the lord of people together with his retinue on the lower wing feathers of a crane. Having written it with musk, combine it with the name, and then, facing directly toward the target, recite one hundred times. Torment that writing over an acacia-wood fire, and it is said to be accomplished over a cremation-ground fire. As long as the monkey fat has not melted, if it is being heated, then the king — even together with a wheel-turning emperor — will certainly be summoned.

From the footprint of the one to be subjugated, mix it with red sandalwood itself and the ash remains from a cremation ground. The practitioner gathers them into one and heats them with unwearying acacia-wood fire, exerting great effort. With both hands rubbing that powder and performing a fire offering, accomplishment comes through however long one burns it.

If one takes that powder and, without distraction, without exhaling, conceals it, then the target becomes as if unconscious and separated from the mind — stupefied and in a state of affliction — and, carried by the force of the wind, falls upon the practitioner. Whether it is a livestock animal or a female messenger, the wise one makes the distinction. Then, for the activity-messenger, this very task is the one to seize upon.

Take a fresh oleander (karavīra) branch, still moist, to shoulder-length, and cast it into a blazing, roaring fire. As long as it has not yet burned, go quickly, take it, recite the vidyā seven times, and then whoever is encircled with recitation will at that very instant — whether a man or a woman in their own form — come by the force of the wind.

Red oleander flowers: reciting one hundred times in the royal rite, the practitioner smears them with musk. Place the flowers in water, then enter a great river, submerge from the navel downward in the water, stand centered between the joined hands, recite the vidyā one thousand times, then scatter it apart with both hands and drink it together with the water. Thereby the practitioner will attain the word-siddhi. A king or a queen will certainly be summoned by mind alone. Gods, asuras, and humans will be swiftly brought under control. With anger, one can kill by word; one can also separate and banish. By the very word of the practitioner, one will bring about complete annihilation. By word alone, rivers, chariots, machines, oceans, elephants, horses, and likewise clouds, a person, or a bird — all are subdued. Whatever is desired in mind from mind, all of it will be accomplished by word.

The rites for summoning that bewilder all women: take proper red oleander flowers, recite the vidyā one hundred times, and insert them into the center of the place of birth. Close those flowers and apply them firmly to the secret place. The mantra-practitioner, endowed with the nondual gnosis yoga, recites one hundred times in unison. The practitioner takes one of those flowers from the center of the place of birth, and whoever is pricked with a flower — that one comes under control in an instant, becoming as if unconscious and separated from the mind, with all their limbs and joints under another's power, their manifest mind reversed. In an instant they are brought under control. This is a truly trustworthy siddhi — it is a subjugation that brings about its intended aim.

This concludes chapter forty-five of the Glorious Hevajra's Definitive Exposition: the ritual chapter on the six yoginīs and the oral prophecy of verbal siddhi.

Then the five syllables of Ha:
accomplishers of every activity —
whoever knows them, even merely that,
quickly enters supreme siddhi.

Haṃ, Hauḥ, Ho, Haiḥ, Hāḥ — the five syllables of Ha.

Clapping the hands with excited urging,
blood pours forth from the mouth,
and the enemy dies in that very instant.

One's own blood resting in a skull —
with the ring finger, rub the blood.
Until it has dried completely,
the target is utterly destroyed.

If one recites while blazing with wrath,
eyes red,
a king together with his army and mounts
will swiftly die.

A cat, a mongoose,
a crow, a fox, and a water tortoise —
apply them charged with power to the ḍākinī.
These accomplish swiftly.
In this tantra, there is no doubt of it.

From the fur of a rabbit and the like,
make a thread and recite one thousand times.
Whoever is bound about the neck with it
will become just like that.

Reciting one thousand times over the hand,
with the flower of the oleander (karavīra),
reciting each syllable individually and distinctly,
and touching a pregnant woman —
the womb will be displaced;
if it is released, she will be freed.

One who is pointed at with the threatening finger will die;
and again they can be restored to life.

This concludes chapter forty-six of the Glorious Hevajra's Definitive Exposition: the ritual chapter on the activities of the five syllables of Ha.

Then what is to be taught correctly:
the essence of all ḍākinīs —
even by merely uttering this,
all siddhis are generated.

Then, if one recites the great ḍākinī-vidyā, all families are brought under control. By constant recitation, great splendor will be generated.

Making a spike six finger-widths long from human bone material, reciting over it one hundred and eight times intensely, and then burying it at someone's doorway — the lineage of that person's family will be cut.

If it is carved into a field, a yard, a buffalo enclosure, an elephant stable, or a horse stall and concealed there, everything in those places will be ruined.

Then, if one desires to bring a king or a king's minister under control: make a clay image eight finger-widths tall, place it skillfully at the king's gate, and on the first day perform one hundred thousand fire offerings with the flowers and fruits of the pomegranate, mixed with jasmine blossoms — that one will come under control.

With this very mantra one may: invoke, press down, dry out, stupify, dull, strip away speech, blind, afflict, and also release.

Then, if one desires to transform a man into a woman: take equal portions of a dead man's flowers, the fruit of castor, the claw of a crow, and the skin from the sole of the foot; mix them with rabbit's blood; form eleven pills and dry them in the shade. Likewise, on an auspicious day, bind them on the hand, and on the twelfth day sprinkle the powder on someone's crown — that person will become a woman.

Then, if one desires to transform a man into a dog: place an iron nail on the head of a mongoose and for seven nights perform one hundred thousand fire offerings; on the eighth day mix equally with saffron, recite intensely one hundred and eight times, perform a powder fire offering, and sprinkle the ash on someone's crown — that person will become a dog.

The restoration: at the time of night, make a great offering to the ḍākinīs and present a torma — after that, the person will revert to their natural state.

If one desires to make something real become unreal: perform one hundred and eight fire offerings with the fruit of the golden tree — it will become unreal. If one performs a fire offering with āruṇā (āmalaka), it will revert to its natural state.

Next, if one desires to cause madness: perform a fire offering at the place of a great bird — on the seventh day, that person will become mad. The restoration: perform a fire offering with rice husks, and they will be pacified.

During a lunar eclipse, collect cat fur, recite over it invoking someone by name, perform a mantra fire offering, and place the ash on that person's crown — that person will become a cat. If one recites in reverse, they will revert to their natural state.

Make a cord from the sinew of a crow, hold it while reciting the mantra intensely, and tie it around someone's neck — that person will become a crow. Whatever creature's sinew is made into a cord, recited over intensely, and tied around someone's neck, that person will take on the form of that creature. In the same way, one can cause someone to take the form of a raven, a cuckoo, a peacock, a water bird, an owl, a hawk, or a vulture.

Make a cord from the hair of a cow, recite it eight hundred times, and tie it around someone's neck — that person will become a cow. Whatever cord is made from the hair of a quadruped or any other creature, recited over intensely and tied around someone's neck, that person will take on the form of that creature. If the cord is untied, they will be freed.

Recite over sour rice, place it in the house of a great lord of wealth, and with what remains empower yourself — within seven nights, all the wealth will be summoned.

This concludes Chapter Forty-Seven, the ritual chapter on all mantra activities of the ḍākinīs of all buddhas, from the Definitive Proclamation of Glorious Heruka.

Now, yet more is to be explained.
The virtue that is the goodness of all ḍākinīs,
the heart of all yoginīs,
accomplishes every desired aim.
By the mere thought of it,
the three worlds are set in motion;
and by sustained recollection of it alone,
true accomplishments come in succession.

Hā svāṭpha hūṃ hūṃ ye nī rñaṇa vajra ba ye nī kiḍā ddhā bu rbas oṃ.

Through the reading of this mantra, accomplishment is achieved —
it brings about every activity and is virtue itself.
The ḍākinīs, the yoginīs,
Khaṇḍaroha, Lāmā, and the rest —
this very mantra is renowned as the mantra of all ḍākinīs.
Whether in the underworld, in the high heavens,
or likewise in the realms of humans,
whatever activities there may be,
this mantra accomplishes them all.
It is the virtue that brings every accomplishment,
the bestower of all attainments.
There is nothing whatsoever more supreme than this;
in all three worlds there is nothing like it,
for this is unsurpassed —
it accomplishes every activity.
The ḍākinī is the abode of all.
This is stated briefly, not at length.

With flowers and fruits of every kind,
one should draw a beautiful mountain,
and upon it always meditate —
the ḍākinī, likewise Lāmā,
Khaṇḍaroha, the yoginī,
and the heroic nature of the heroes.
Ha ha he he, as they are called —
the twenty-four heroes
are the supreme bliss of the ḍākinī net.

Vajrasattva and Vairocana,
likewise Padmanartteśvara,
Śrī Heruka himself,
Sky-Heart and Hayagrīva,
Ratnavajra the greatly powerful,
Evil-Eye and the Terrifying One,
Auspicious Vajra and the Supremely Good,
Vajra-Hūṃkāra the great hero,
likewise the Vajra-Haired One,
the Sprout-Bearing and the Vajra-Bodied,
the Very Vajra-Light,
Amitābha and the Foe of the Gods,
likewise the Gnashing-Tusked One,
Skeleton and Great Skeleton,
the Hollow Fragment, and the rest —
these twenty-four heroes
pervade all these beings.

The heroes and the ḍākinīs themselves,
the yoginīs — the supremely fierce and others —
should be visualized as dwelling in the maṇḍala
by the practitioner engaged in every activity.
One who truly desires accomplishment, abiding deeply in equipoise,
should always meditate on the identity of the maṇḍala.
By the ritual described before,
recite the supreme bliss of the ḍākinī net.
The great maṇḍala is the abode of all accomplishments,
and likewise the ground of every attainment.
This is accompanied by ten million buddhas,

each hero is attended by ten million retinues,
and each ḍākinī likewise has retinues numbering ten million.
The yoginī is the ḍākinī herself —
she who has form and she who is born of fragments,
and similarly Lāmā and the rest:
these are the virtue that accomplishes all attainments.

From the glorious Hevajra Tantra, this is the forty-eighth chapter: the ritual of the secret maṇḍala of all the heroes and ḍākinīs.

Now, further, what remains to be explained:
by the correct ritual, animals are to be produced —
and one who merely knows this
will swiftly attain accomplishment.

The mantrin, from powdered grain made into offering flour,
should fashion animal forms in due sequence:
a human, a tortoise, a female frog,
a donkey, a jackal, a horse, and so forth.
These various forms — purified animals —
should be understood as those very animals.
Their characteristics as they are,
and what follows from them, will now be explained.

Whether born once, twice, three times, four times, or five times,
or whether it be a sixth or seventh birth —
that such a being is reborn among animals is beyond doubt.

One whose breath is fragrant,
whose eyes gaze steadily without blinking,
who speaks truthfully and rejoices on seeing others,
who always delights in the sacred Dharma,
who knows their own past birth,
and whose body is always fragrant —
one possessed of these characteristics
is born for seven lives.

By merely eating it, one takes on the body of a god.
By smelling or touching it alone,
or by whoever applies the bindu,
accomplishment comes in an instant,
and one will hold a form of one's own choosing.

The wise one, having taken the flesh from the heart of such a being
and then recited the essence-mantra,
should apply the bindu accordingly.
Whatever sentient being's form one wishes to assume,
without any doubt, by that bindu
one will transform into that very form.

The wise one, having taken the sap of tree leaves
together with the flesh of the heart,
if one applies the bindu to one's own forehead,
without any doubt that form will be transformed.

With the hair of that very animal,
one should bind one's hands upon the crown of the head.
Possessing its five limbs
and mixed with its hair,
if the hands are bound upon the crown of the head,
without any doubt that form will be attained.

Though practitioners who meditate and recite possess great power,
those who are inclined toward difficulty and delight in afflictions
obstruct the path to accomplishment.

An elephant, a horse, a donkey,
a female frog, a pig, a fox,
a crow, an owl, a vulture and similar birds,
a crane, a hawk, a heron —
into beautiful forms, ugly forms,
and divine forms will one be transformed.
That such a great hero of yoga is born in a form of his own choosing —
in this there is no doubt.
A supreme accomplishment higher than this
does not exist in all three worlds.

From the glorious Hevajra Tantra, this is the forty-ninth chapter: the ritual of the total transformation of form, which is to be accomplished through the seventh birth.

Now the fire-offering ritual:
it is declared to be one that certainly brings beings under one's power,
and by the correct ritual
swiftly attaining accomplishment has been described.

One should mix cow-dung earth with the intoxicating substance
and perform the fire offering with the left hand.
If even a buddha can be brought under one's power by this,
what need is there to speak of an ordinary person?

With saliva, teeth-cleaning sticks,
and likewise that which pleases one's own body —
by the intoxicating substance along with its name,
the three realms will be brought under one's power.

With the menstrual blood of one of lunar mark,
and with moist foods that have been eaten,
combined with a human's hair —
instantly one will be summoned.

One should perform the fire offering with one's own vomit,
or the wise one should perform the fire offering with one's own hair.
If it is thoroughly applied to the neem tree,
instantly separation will occur.

In balanced equipoise, in the fire of the charnel ground,
having sprinkled into it a vessel of mustard-seed oil,
performing the fire offering with a crow's wing —

instantly death or banishment will occur.

Whether sleeping or waking, sitting,
or in relation to food, union, and the like —
if the wise one constantly recites over these,
no obstacle-makers will exist for that person.

Performing the fire offering a hundred times with fox meat,
the person who truly performs the fire offering in this way
will, within three months thereafter,
destroy the poverty of their lineage.

With certain great meats endowed with intoxicating power,
one performs the fire offering.
Up to one hundred and eight times,
the practitioner performs three sessions.
Through practice over all the lands without exception,
within six months one will gain mastery.
The ḍākinī who is thereby pleased
will without doubt bestow sovereignty.

Having meditated on all the deities
and performed the fire offering for two sessions,
one will, through that very practice,
attain the power of travelling through the sky in one's own body.

With gomāyu and flesh and alcohol,
one should perform the inner and outer fire offerings.
Quickly one will come into their hands,
and all accomplishments will be fully obtained.

Reciting the mantra at night,
one also summons the surrounding region.
If one performs this each and every day,
one will become a king.

There is no other supreme excellence than this
anywhere in the three worlds.
The great yogin dies at will,
assumes and sports in diverse forms.

With the meat of the bael tree fruit, and likewise
with udumbara fruit itself,
performing the fire offering a hundred thousand times,
quickly one will become a great lord of wealth.

Mixing gomā, meat, and intoxicant,
one who desires sovereignty should perform the fire offering.
If the powerful lord of yogins is pleased,
how could one ever become poor?

By performing the fire offering with gomāyu,
whatever is desired will be accomplished.
By the fire offering with gomāyu,
quickly one will become equal to the lord of wealth.

Even without ascetic purity,
the accomplishments of the teaching will be obtained.

With the auspicious life-plant, kuṣmāṇḍa,
mudga, māṣa, cāṇaka,
honey and curds, śketsema,
and the leaves of the domestic tamalaka —
one will come to be bound at the mouth.
The yogin who acts freely
dwells wherever they find delight.

Now there is yet more to be explained.

The ground and sacred site of the yoginī,
the glorious Heruka — its causes, aspects,
possessing the nature of animate and inanimate —
the site is the ground of supreme delight.
Likewise the nearby site without stain:
know that this field is luminous.
The near field is one from which radiance streams.
Cchandoha becomes directly manifest.
The near cchandoha is difficult to purify.
The assembly has gone far.
The nearby assembly is immovable.
The charnel ground is one of excellent intelligence.
The near charnel ground is the cloud of Dharma.

This, within the practice of the glorious Heruka's system,
is the ground of the inner nature.
The grounds of the ten perfections
are the code-language of the yoginīs.
In the high realm, on the earth's surface, and below the earth,
the hero's aspects — animate and inanimate —
what has been taught as Pullīra and so forth
abides as both outer and inner in nature.

The glorious great blood-drinking king,
sovereign lord of all desires, foremost,
with hands and feet present everywhere,
with eyes, face, and head in all directions,
with ears present everywhere in the world,
he dwells covering all, in complete repose.

Then, concerning the accomplishment of spiritual attainments:
with a mind endowed with meditative concentration,
for the benefit of the practitioner,
this secret reality has been taught.

This concludes the fiftieth chapter of the Definitive Statement of the Glorious Heruka, the ritual chapter teaching the fire offerings of the rite of empowerment, the sacred sites, and related matters.

Then there is yet more to be explained.

The pith instruction is extremely hard to find.
In the code-language of the heroes,
I have concealed it within the tantra.

Garments, the five mudrās, and so on,
the wisdom branch, the kīla, the net,
what is called āli and kāli,
emptiness as cause, preceded by a thousand,
entry beginning from sound —
as long as that which has the union of condensation:
the nirvāṇa that satisfies with nectar,
the empowerment of hand-offering,
thoroughly protected by the great armour,
is to be worshipped by all the mantras.

Thus those very fourteen —

This is a summary explanation.

The supreme person who practises everything completely,
all whose sins are utterly purified,
attains the ground of the Tathāgata,
and birth after birth becomes a dharma-endowed
king born in the lineage of the Sugata.

All the characteristics of sins accumulated before
are thereby made inferior and weak.
Whoever constantly meditates upon this
is master of all desires on the grounds.

For example, a vessel filled with butter,
if placed in the midst of fire,
will melt, the butter rising to the surface,
and the impurities of the vessel will be destroyed.
Likewise, by the name of glorious Heruka,
sins are destroyed.

By meditation and mental reflection alone,
or by reading, reciting, and writing it,
one obtains the enjoyments of the higher realms,
or one attains the turning of the wheel as a wheel-turning king.

When yogins pass from this life,
ḍākinīs — such as the glorious blood-drinker (Heruka's retinue) and others —
holding in their hands garlands of various flowers,
bearing victory banners and pennants of every kind,
with the sounds of many musical instruments,
and the offering of various songs,
lead this conceptual notion called "death"
to the realm of sky-faring ones.

Such great heroic ḍākinīs
are hard to find upon this earth.

Whoever comes to know the great tantra of glorious Heruka
but has no faith in it
will constantly fall into the suffering of poverty and affliction.

Adorned with necklaces, bangles, and armlets,
with earrings, the sacred thread of Brahmā,
a pectoral ornament, a garland on the head,
and a waist-belt making tinkling sounds,
she arises as āli and kāli
at the centre of a lotus of many kinds upon a mountain peak,
the white mistress, all-subduing,
embracing the body with vajra and bell.

With the assembly of heroes and ḍākinīs
bearing the half of twenty-four,
the supreme state of the great king, glorious Heruka,
is to be meditated upon.

In the midst of all the heroes and ḍākinīs
with their retinues, one endowed with union —
all become delighted and reach non-duality,
and this is what draws forth and gathers.

To sentient beings of many different inclinations
one displays conduct of many kinds;
to disciples of varied dispositions
one teaches skillful means of many kinds.

Even if one does not gain faith
in the teaching of the profound Dharma,
one should not condemn it,
but remember that the nature of reality is inconceivable.

That this is beyond the scope of oneself here,
that one does not know the nature of reality —
this is known by the fully awakened buddhas
and their great sons, the bodhisattvas.

Whether buddhas arise in the world
or do not arise, the nature of reality,
inconceivable in every aspect,
abides without increase or decrease.

Though it is established in such a way,
all worldly people who come need not be scorned,
for its range of traversal is immeasurable
and the play of the buddhas is inconceivable.

The divisions of sūtra conduct, Yoga, and the culmination of Secret Yoga —
sentient beings enter them according to their inclinations,
each delighting in that which suits them.

This is the fifty-first chapter from the King of Tantras of the Great Ḍākinī, called the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka — the wondrous tantra of accomplishment extracted from the Hundred Thousand Verses of the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka, which fills one with wonder. This is the guru accomplished from the very beginning, the king of all treatises, the glorious great hero Heruka, accomplished by reading, unattainable by all others.

Thus ends chapter fifty-one from the King of Tantras of the Great Ḍākinī, entitled the Definitive Exposition of Glorious Heruka.

The celebrated and pleasing, holding high the banner of fame,
the equal of a jewel, Rinchen Zangpo the excellent,
translated this from a Kashmiri manuscript, the source of knowledge,
before the face of the learned Padmākara.
Perfumed with the fragrance of superior moral discipline,
flawlessly accurate in its meaning as declared,
before the face of the renowned one possessed of realization,
the translator monk Prajñākīrti
and Marpa the Translator, Chökyi Wangchuk,
collated it with a central-country manuscript, the source of the learned.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The phrase rendered "half-deathless" translates a Tibetan expression meaning literally "one becomes half of the ten-sixteenths" or "half of the ten [parts of death]," which is an idiomatic tantric way of saying that the practitioner attains a form of partial deathlessness or longevity siddhi. The precise numerological meaning is technically obscure and may refer to specific tantric numerology of the sixteen joys or digits of the moon.

The "sixteen-fold" in the verse about the vajra-holder likely refers to the sixteen joys or the sixteen digits of the moon, a standard framework in the Cakrasaṃvara cycle. The verse states that such a practitioner's power cannot be matched.

The term rendered "messenger born together with the accomplished one" is a reference to the Tibetan concept of the innately born consort or ḍākinī who arises simultaneously with realization — a technical category in the Cakrasaṃvara tantric tradition.

The phrase "owls and pigs" in the charnel-ground maṇḍala preparation is a reference to charnel-ground beings or creatures associated with those environments, used in standard impure substances (aśuci) protocols of the Heruka cycle; some editions read this differently.  The term rendered as "fence-posts" translates a word meaning boundary-posts or stakes that demarcate the protective perimeter of the ritual space; some traditions read these as the four or eight directional stakes of the protective circle.

The phrase "triple assault" renders a term meaning attack from the three times or three types of adversaries; the precise referent varies by commentary but the sense is that the armor is impenetrable from any quarter.

The "cord without sentience" refers to a measuring cord, possibly contrasted with a cord soaked in blood for a more powerful form of the rite; the exact ritual distinction is not fully transparent from the text alone.

The count of fifty in "garlands of fifty" renders a standard Tibetan expression for a fifty-bead garland, traditionally understood as fifty human skulls.  The passage "Lāmā" and "Khaṇḍarohā" are left as proper names because they refer to specific ḍākinī figures within the Heruka/Cakrasaṃvara tantric system, not to the term "lama" in its general sense. Khaṇḍarohā is a well-known ḍākinī in the Cakrasaṃvara maṇḍala.

The phrase rendered "the hawk, the gaze, the hand-holding, the embrace, the union of two" follows the Tibetan list of initiatory actions associated with the empowerment rite in Heruka tantra; "the hawk" (rgod) may refer to a specific ritual gesture or initiation type. This list is technical and its precise referents vary by commentary.

The final stanza's reference to "the Concise, or the Saṃvara, or the Secret, or the Vajrabhairava" likely refers to related tantric texts or alternative titles — the precise identification of each depends on the broader textual tradition and is not fully determinable from this passage alone.  The long central section describing specific letters by their positions within Sanskrit phonemic classification groups is a technical cryptographic or coded mantra-construction passage. The Sanskrit phonological tradition divides the alphabet into the vowels (the ā-series, āli), the consonants (the kā-series, kāli), and further classifies consonants by place of articulation into groups (varga): gutturals, palatals, retroflexes, dentals, and labials (each group of five), followed by the semivowels (antastha) and sibilants and aspirates (uṣman). The passage instructs the practitioner to extract specific letters by group number and position within the group in order to compose a hidden mantra or seed-syllable sequence. The passage breaks off mid-enumeration; translation has been rendered as literally as possible. Any attempt to reconstruct the actual letters encoded here would require comparison with a full Sanskrit alphabet grid as understood in this tantric lineage and is beyond what the text alone permits.  This passage belongs to the cryptographic syllable-encoding section of a Vajrayāna dhāraṇī or mantra-compilation text, in which the letters of mantras are encoded by their position within classified alphabetical series (the five varga classes, the antastha semi-vowels, the uṣman sibilants, and so on). The "ka-ṣa class" refers to a traditional grouping of letters outside the standard varga arrangement. "Son of the sun" likely encodes a specific letter through a traditional epithet-cipher. "Water of the fifth" and similar phrases involving bca (bcwa) likely denote vowel markers or special orthographic signs. "Rounded" refers to the anusvāra or a similar circular diacritical mark. "Luminosity" in the phrase "abiding of luminosity" may encode a specific syllable or may carry the tantric technical meaning of the clear-light mind. The full decoded mantra cannot be reconstructed from context alone. Vajrasattva's role as "opening" a particular letter position is a conventional formula in such encoding texts.  This passage is a technical yoginī-tantra manual for constructing mantras by specifying which consonants and vowels from the Sanskrit phonemic alphabet are to be combined. The ordinal references — "the first of the first," "the third of the uṣman class," "the eighth of the antastha group," and so forth — are technical notations referring to the traditional Sanskrit varṇamālā divided into its phonetic classes: the five varga groups of stops (ka-varga through pa-varga), the antastha class (semi-vowels: ya, ra, la, va), and the uṣman class (sibilants and ha). The vowel sequence (dbyaṅs yig) follows the standard Sanskrit vowel enumeration. Precise identification of the resulting phonemes would require a dedicated commentary; the translation renders the structural description faithfully. "Light-maker" renders 'od byed, which likely encodes a specific syllable-name in this context but is translated literally as the text stands.  This passage is a syllable-by-syllable encoding instruction for a mantra or dhāraṇī, specifying which vowel markers, fire-signs, semi-vowels, and auxiliary letters are to be combined with each numbered syllable. The technical vocabulary (vowel syllables by number, "fire" as the visarga or anusvāra mark, "sun" as a specific diacritical indicator, "lower portion," "seeds," antastha for semi-vowels, mātr̥kā for the matrix syllables) belongs to a specialized tantric syllabary tradition. The precise identification of each numbered vowel and consonant depends on the particular syllabary system employed in the root tantra, and without the accompanying syllabary table the individual correspondences cannot be verified with certainty. The term rendered "sixth mātr̥kā syllable" for མ་མོ་དྲུག་པ reflects that མ་མོ here functions as a term for the matrix syllables rather than the more common meaning of "mother-spirit."  The passage is a highly technical tantric syllable-analysis section enumerating specific consonant syllables (numbered within a canonical Indic alphabet) and their combinations with specific vowels, mātṛkā letters, and diacritical marks (bindu and nāda). The term "mātṛkā" here refers to the matrix-alphabet of Sanskrit letters as used in tantric syllable enumeration; the numbering system presupposes a fixed Sanskrit syllabary. The word rendered "elemental spirits" for "འབྱུང་པོ" (bhūta) follows standard tantric commentary. The phrase "king of horses" at the close likely alludes to a specific deity or mantra associated with the horse (aśvarāja) in the relevant tantric cycle; no further clarification is available from context. Some of the syllable-number correspondences are internally ambiguous due to the condensed listing format; the translation follows the most syntactically plausible reading throughout.  The passage contains dense sequences of untranslated Sanskrit seed syllables and mantra strings, which have been rendered in transliteration exactly as they stand, following the convention established in preceding passages.

The term rendered "Remig" is a proper title — a Tibetan tantric source text — and is retained as such, consistent with the preceding passage's reference to it.

The phrase rendered "the birthplaces of all gods, all nāgas, all yakṣas, and all gandharvas" takes "skye gnas" as "birthplace" or "place of arising," which in this mantra-power context most likely means their entire realm or mode of existence; it could also be read as "all beings in the birthplaces of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas," but the more literal rendering is kept.  The phrase rendered "like one beating a hat" is a Tibetan idiom meaning to labor at something entirely futile, the equivalent of beating a worn-out felt cap to get warmth from it. The point is that effort without knowledge of this mantra is wholly wasted.

The term tsaru in the phrase "foods and drinks of the tsaru rite" is a transliteration of a Sanskritized term likely referring to a ritual food offering preparation; its precise identity in this tantric context is uncertain.

The verse passage beginning "Glorious Heruka is wisdom itself" employs a first-person voice attributed to Heruka himself, who speaks as "I" in the subsequent prose sections on the three bodies. This self-referential divine voice is preserved in the translation.  The term rendered "longevity resin" translates a word (ldong ros) that likely refers to a specific medicinal or ritual resin; its precise botanical identity is uncertain but it is consistently associated with longevity preparations in tantric ritual contexts.

The "seventh shadow that moves with the gait of a goose" is a ritual technical description of a specific kind of human candidate or substance used in the siddhi practice; the passage is elliptical and the exact referent is not made fully explicit in the text.

The skull described as "eye-medicine for the ears" renders an unusual compound (rna ba'i mig sman dang thod pa) that may indicate a skull used as a vessel for a specific medicinal application; the syntax is genuinely ambiguous.  The term rendered "gravel" for གསེག་མ is a small stone or gravel-like substance; the precise substance is somewhat uncertain but this is the standard reading in ritual contexts. The compound མི་འམ་ཅི (kinnara) is rendered according to its standard classification as a semi-divine being, literally "is that a human?" in Tibetan folk etymology. The final two lines are verse opening a new section and break off mid-enumeration; they are translated as they stand.  The syllable-glossary section near the end of this passage belongs to a Tantric "twilight language" or coded vocabulary, in which mantra syllables are assigned specific meanings within the tradition. The rendering follows the most natural reading of the Tibetan glosses, though several items — particularly "Bha means an empty vessel," "Ja means two gifts," and "Sa means one who does not go elsewhere" — are opaque and the Tibetan itself may reflect technical in-group usages that resist transparent translation. These are rendered literally as the text gives them.

The asterism used for the cloth-making rite is identified by context as Jyeṣṭhā, the eighteenth lunar mansion in the Indian system, corresponding to the Tibetan "royal asterism" (skar ma rgyal). This is a standard identification in Indo-Tibetan ritual literature.  The phrase rendered "born of bone" follows the Tibetan rus byung, which in the tantric context refers to a lineage classification system based on physical and behavioral characteristics. The term is technical jargon within the Hevajra tantric tradition and does not have a single transparent English equivalent; "born of bone" preserves the literal meaning while signaling its specialized character.

The "seven types" enumerated in the text appear to list only five lineages explicitly in this passage (the bone lineage, the hero-follower, the hero's heart, the Vajra lineage, the Tathāgata lineage, and the Vairocana lineage — which is six). The count of seven may refer to a fuller classification that includes material from a broader context. This is a genuine textual tension worth noting.

The phrase "non-dual" in the triad "the hero, the non-dual, and the yoginī" translates gnyis med, which here likely refers to a specific category of practitioner or deity in the Hevajra system rather than the philosophical term for non-duality; the translation preserves ambiguity intentionally.  The seven named ḍākinīs — Yāminī, Bhayaṅkarī, Vānadurgā, Trāsinī, Sarvarūpacāriṇī, Rūpiṇī, Tsumbiṇī, Lāmā, Khaṇḍarohā, and Ehikā — are technical proper names retained in Sanskrit-approximate transliteration as they appear in the Tibetan phonetic rendering. The first verse grouping of seven and the second grouping of seven appear to be two distinct enumerations using overlapping or differently categorized lists; this is a known feature of the root tantra text and is preserved as given rather than harmonized.

The phrase rendered "speaks in an empty, hollow manner" translates གསོང་པོར་སྨྲ་བ, which literally means "speaks hollowly" or "speaks emptily" — possibly a behavioral sign of possession or a dissociated mental state. This is a genuine interpretive uncertainty.

The final verse is incomplete as supplied; the translation ends where the Tibetan passage ends.  The term lāmā here appears to function as a technical category label for a class of female consort or ḍākinī type rather than the common Tibetan honorific for a teacher. This is consistent with the tantric context: the passage identifies several subtypes of lāmā along with their physical marks and auspicious ritual times.

The term Khaṇḍarohā is a name of a ḍākinī associated with one of the four or five ḍākinī families in the Heruka Chakrasaṃvara cycle; it is retained untranslated as a proper name.

The phrase rendered "enemy-stakes" translates a term referring to ritual implements or symbols used in wrathful practices; it is kept descriptive rather than overly technical for the listening audience.  The term rendered "lāmā" throughout continues the established pattern from the preceding passage, where it designates a type or class of yoginī characterized by specific physical marks, associated with a particular deity. The Tibetan "མཚན་ཉིད་གྱུར་པ་འདི་དག་ཡིན" is literally "these are the characteristics that have arisen" or "these are the defining marks," rendered as "these are the characteristics."

The phrase "མིང་སྲིང་དུ་ནི་དེ་བཞིན་འགྱུར" rendered as "will likewise become as a sibling in truth" carries the sense of being recognized as a genuine vajra-kin or dharma-sibling within the tantric community; the exact nuance of "མིང་སྲིང" as either blood-sibling or dharma-sibling is contextually ambiguous.

"གཡོན་མ་ཐེབས" is the left thumb; "བླ་མའི་སྐྱེ་བོ" means literally "a person of the lāmā" or "the lāmā's person," here indicating a protector or representative of the lāmā lineage.  The phrase rendered "the border's edge" for མཚམས་ཀྱི་མཐའ is uncertain in context; it likely refers to a specific bodily boundary or limit used as a gestural target in the sign-code system, but the precise referent is unclear from the text alone.

The passage གློ་བུར་རྣམ་པར་བཟློག་འགྱུར་ཏེ། །སྔར་བཞིན་གདོང་ནི་འཇིག་གྱུར་པ། is syntactically and semantically challenging; the rendering "suddenly the expression changes completely: the face, once as it was before, is now dissolved" follows the most natural reading but the passage may describe a specific tantric recognition phenomenon whose technical sense is preserved only in oral commentary.

The term ལིང་ག (liṅga) is rendered in Sanskrit as it is a direct Tibetan borrowing of the Sanskrit term for the male sexual organ, used here as a body-part in the sign-code.  The central portion of this passage is a glossary of code-words (secret language, sometimes called saṃdhyābhāṣā or twilight language) used among tantric practitioners to communicate covertly. The Tibetan text presents each term in transliterated Sanskrit followed by its Tibetan gloss. These have been rendered by identifying the Sanskrit term and giving its Tibetan gloss in English, preserving the list format as found in the original.

The closing mantra is rendered in reconstructed Sanskrit transliteration directly from the Tibetan phonetic rendering. Some syllables in the mantra are tantric seed-syllables without standard semantic glosses and are left as pronounced. The phrase paśarudhirāntramālāvalambine, meaning "you who are adorned with a garland of blood, entrails, and flesh," reflects standard Heruka iconographic description.

The "eight concealed ones" (sbas pa brgyad) applied at the end is a technical tantric expression likely referring to eight esoteric elements or hidden syllables appended to the mantra for specific ritual purposes; the exact referent is not further specified in this passage.  The term "caru" in "should always eat caru" renders the Tibetan transliteration "ཙ་རུ" of Sanskrit caru, a ritual food offering typically consisting of cooked grain or similar consecrated substance used in both Vedic and tantric contexts. Its precise referent in this specific Heruka tantra cycle may carry a more esoteric sense, but the transliteration is retained as a technical term.

The phrase rendered "the hollow free of anger" translates "ཁྲོ་མེད་སྦུབས་སུ," which is a tantric technical expression. "Sbugs" can mean a cavity or hollow, and in tantric contexts may refer to an interior channel or space; the rendering given is literal and preserves the ambiguity.

The "eight beginning with the crow-faced one" refers to a set of eight messenger goddesses whose leader has the face of a crow, a well-known set within Heruka maṇḍala systems.  The term rendered "pure dwelling" throughout translates gtsang sbra, a technical Tantric term referring to a code of pure conduct or behavioral observance, distinct from physical cleanliness alone. The triple division of pure dwelling into the messenger, peacefulness, and single-meal conduct is a formal enumeration standard in this genre.

"Three armors" (go cha gsum) refers to a set of three kinds of tantric protective adornment; the exact enumeration varies by context and is not specified here in the text.

"Mātṛkā goddesses" renders ma mo (Sanskrit mātṛkā), the fierce mother goddesses of the tantric retinue.  The phrase rendered "heroes and yoginīs, the stable as forerunners and the moving" reflects a technical classification in Cakrasaṃvara-related tantra of fixed and moving deity-assemblies; the Tibetan is compressed and the exact doctrinal referent is context-dependent.

The line on "triangular maṇḍala" with the meats listed followed by "even the buddhas will assuredly be dissolved" is a dense tantric statement. The verb "dissolved" or "destroyed" here likely refers to the antinomian dissolution of conventional buddhological categories through the offering, not literal destruction; this is a well-known rhetorical trope of transgressive tantric literature.

The phrase "activities of warmth" near the end likely refers to the subtle-body practices of inner heat (tummo); the exact referent is not entirely transparent from the Tibetan alone.  The long central section of this passage is an extremely technical cryptographic or numerological instruction for constructing a mantra by combining specific cells (re mig, "cells" of a table), vowels, and syllables through arithmetic operations (division, joining, reversal of sequence). The precise mantra being constructed appears to be "Conqueror of the Three Realms" (khams gsum rgyal), a known Heruka mantra formula. The exact decoding of the cell-numbers into specific letters cannot be confirmed without the accompanying table (a mantra-construction grid), so the translation renders the structural instructions faithfully without speculating on the decoded output. The "fire-child" (me yi bu) is a standard designation for the anusvāra or a particular vowel-class marker in tantric syllabary systems. The term "nāda" (nā da) refers to the resonance-dot or half-vowel marker above the bindu in syllable notation.  The term translated as "the Condensed form" refers to a condensed or saṃkṣipta version of Heruka; "Glorious Supreme" and "Cakrasaṃvara" and "Vajrabhairava" are named tantric deities whose mantras share the same structural elements being described.

The phrase "the Vajra Born of Terror" renders a compound meaning a vajra that is born of or that produces terror, used here as a ritual substance name in the context of the five great fleshes.

"Tsumbiā" is a transliteration of the Sanskrit Tsumbiā or Cumbikā, a name for one of the ḍākinī goddesses of the maṇḍala, here glossed in the text itself as emptiness and the perfection.

"Female human drum" for mi rnga mo is uncertain; it may refer to a drum made from a human being or to a type of female drum-spirit used in wrathful rites. The precise referent among the listed animals is not entirely clear in the textual tradition.

"Among gods, that which moves its lips" is an obscure circumlocution; it likely refers to a specific deity or divine being recognized within the Heruka tantric commentarial tradition, but the exact referent is uncertain without further commentary.  The "twice-born" renders skye gnyis, which in Indian ritual contexts denotes a brahmin; this is contextually apt given the list of ritual substances and beings. The "laughing one" renders bzhad which may be a bird name (possibly a species of laughing thrush or similar); the pairing with khruṅ khruṅ (crane) suggests an avian context, though it could also be a jackal's cry — the translation follows the most natural reading.

"Cattle dung and floating matter" for ba lang gnas dang lding ba renders a difficult phrase; gnas (dwelling, settled) may modify ba lang differently, but the ritual-substance context (given that dried and root follow) supports reading this as excretory or bodily products of cattle, consistent with Tantric sādhana material pharmacopoeia.

The passage describing the four-handed, four-faced white wrathful deity is notably dense; the referent appears to be a fierce form associated with the Heruka maṇḍala, possibly Mahākāla or a related protector, but the text does not name him explicitly.  The term avadhūtī refers to the central channel in tantric subtle-body physiology; rendering it in transliteration is standard in tantric contexts, as it carries a precise technical meaning that has no transparent English equivalent.

Khaṇḍaroha is a proper name, apparently a deity or a class of being specific to the Heruka cycle; the Tibetan simply transliterates the Sanskrit, and the text does not gloss it further.

The phrase rendered "garland of seeds" refers to a seed-syllable garland in the visualisation, a common tantric technique; "seeds" here means bīja-syllables rather than botanical seeds.

The phrase rendered "revolve completely with the force of an arrow" describes a tantric visualisation in which mantra-syllables spin rapidly; the exact technical procedure is compressed and the translation follows the literal sense.  The phrase rendered "left-handed conduct" reflects a technical term for antinomian or transgressive tantric practice, often associated with certain rites performed with the left hand or in violation of conventional norms. The doctrinal context here is the Heruka or Cakrasaṃvara cycle.

"Vārāhī" is the deity implied by "Phagmo" dwelling in Heruka's heart; she is his consort, the sow-faced goddess, and the identification is standard in this cycle.

The final line of the passage is syntactically incomplete; the Tibetan text appears to break off mid-sentence, and the translation reflects this.  The phrase rendered "mantra moon" is a technical tantric term referring to the lunar syllable or mantra-cycle associated with the hero; its precise referent depends on the specific Heruka tradition and may carry more specific ritual meaning than can be conveyed in translation alone.

The list of geographical names in the final section corresponds to the classical enumeration of pīṭhas (sacred tantric sites) found across several Heruka and Cakrasaṃvara tantric cycles. Some of the spellings are uncertain owing to phonetic transcription from Sanskrit into Tibetan; the renderings given follow the most commonly accepted identifications in scholarship on this tantra.

The phrase "one hundred and eight" refers to a count of mantra recitations or ritual acts; the specific referent is left implicit in the text as typical of this genre.  The term translated as "the one born of dismemberment" for དུམ་སྐྱེས་མ in Triśakune is a compound meaning literally "born from pieces or fragments," a recognized epithet in this context. The precise identity of this figure is left as given in the text.

The phrase བདེན་པས་ཚངས་པར་སྤྱོད་པ is rendered as "by truth, by the conduct of brahmic life," following the dual sense of the phrase — brahmic or pure conduct as well as the performative dimension of truth. In tantric context this likely carries a technical sense of a truth-act or sacred vow-speech alongside chaste or ritually pure conduct.

The list of sacred place-names and their associated classes of female beings in this passage maps onto the standard Cakrasaṃvara twenty-four-site system. The names Rūpikā and Pāñcāla are retained from the Tibetan phonological renderings and correspond to attested Sanskrit forms in the Heruka Tantras.  The phrase rendered "mistresses of speech" translates a term meaning female beings with lordship or power over speech; in this tantric context these are likely a class of ḍākinīs or yoginī figures associated with mantra and speech power, and the translation reflects that resonance.

The term "pra se na" in the Tibetan is a transliteration of Sanskrit praśna or praśenā, referring to a form of divination or visionary inquiry, here rendered as "vision of divination." This is a genuine transliteration from Sanskrit and the precise ritual meaning may vary by tradition.

The "seven-syllable mantra" referred to throughout is a specific mantra whose identity is not disclosed in this passage; this is consistent with tantric practice of not openly revealing mantra syllables in commentary contexts.

The phrase "binding the directions" refers to a ritual technique of sealing the cardinal and intermediate directions with mantra and mudrā so that no outside beings can witness the practice.  The phrase rendered "one hundred wombs" translates a term that may refer to one hundred birth-sources or generative loci, possibly a technical ritual enumeration; the precise referent is unclear from context alone.

The term "iron filings" renders a compound meaning literally "iron powder," used in the subjugation rite.

The karavīra flower is the oleander, Nerium oleander, a plant with well-attested ritual and toxic properties in Indian tradition; the gloss is given once.  The phrase rendered as "the three heating substances" refers to a standard Āyurvedic and tantric group typically consisting of black pepper, long pepper, and dried ginger, though variants exist in the tantric literature.

"Word-siddhi" renders the Tibetan term for a siddhi associated with the power of speech or mantra, such that the practitioner's words themselves become effective as commands or spells.

The phrase "nondual gnosis yoga" renders a condensed Tibetan compound indicating a practitioner who abides in the yoga of nondual primordial wisdom, a standard tantric qualification.  The term translated as "the flowers of a dead man" renders a Tibetan compound that literally means something like "the flower belonging to a male corpse." The exact botanical referent is unclear from context; the phrase may be a ritual euphemism for a bodily substance or, less likely, an actual flower associated with a male corpse. The ambiguity is doctrinally inconsequential here but philologically notable.

The phrase translated as "the five syllables of Ha" refers to the five variant forms of the syllable Ha listed immediately after: Haṃ, Hauḥ, Ho, Haiḥ, Hāḥ — a standard Hevajra-tantra formulation.

The plant name karavīra (oleander) is given in the Tibetan by transliteration; the identification is standard.

The castor plant is rendered from ka ga an di ka, a transliteration of Sanskrit kāgaṇḍikā or similar; the castor-plant identification is conventional in Indic ritual literature.  The mantra string "Hā svāṭpha hūṃ hūṃ ye nī rñaṇa vajra ba ye nī kiḍā ddhā bu rbas oṃ" is a phonetic rendering of a tantric mantra preserved in Tibetan transliteration; it is not translated but reproduced as recited Sanskrit-derived syllables, as is standard for dhāraṇī and mantra passages.

The deity names in the list of twenty-four heroes — Evil-Eye, the Terrifying One, Auspicious Vajra, and so forth — are epithets of wrathful tantric deities standard to the Heruka-Cakrasaṃvara cycle. Their Tibetan forms are preserved as descriptive English renderings since no single fixed Sanskrit equivalent is determinable from context alone.  The passage is a chapter from the Hevajra Tantra dealing with tantric ritual procedures. The term rendered "bindu" refers to the ritual drop or essence-substance central to the transformative rite; it is left in Sanskrit as it is a technical term without clean English equivalent. The phrase translated "she who has form and she who is born of fragments" renders "gzugs can ma dang dum skyes ma," two categories of ḍākinī classified in the Hevajratantra commentarial tradition. "Lāmā" here is not the title "lama" but a specific ḍākinī-class name in the Hevajra system. The chapter ends mid-sentence, consistent with the fragmentary nature of the passage as provided.  The term "gomāyu" appears to be the Sanskrit word for jackal, a standard ritual substance in tantric contexts. "Gomā" likely refers to sesame or a related plant, but the compound gomāmāṃsa may read as "sesame and meat"; the repetition in context with gomāyu suggests these are distinct.

The place-name Pullīra (Tib. pu lī ra) is a traditional sacred site in Heruka maṇḍala geography; it is retained untranslated as a proper name.

The phrase "cchandoha" (Tib. tshan doha) is a technical tantric term, likely a Sanskrit loanword referring to a type of sacred assembly or gathering site in the Heruka cycle; it is retained as a transliteration pending a more established English rendering.

The āli-kāli terminology refers to the vowel-consonant series used in tantric subtle-body practice; no gloss is inserted into the body text.

The final line "thus those very fourteen" is clearly a continuation, with the sentence incomplete at the passage break; this is faithful to the Tibetan.  The phrase rendered "bearing the half of twenty-four" refers to the twelve heroes and twelve ḍākinīs of the twenty-four sacred places (Sanskrit: pīṭha), a standard Cakrasaṃvara-cycle numerical schema; the Tibetan is compressed and the precise referent depends on the specific tantric commentary tradition.

The colophon names three figures: Rinchen Zangpo (958–1055), the great Tibetan translator; a learned Kashmiri paṇḍita called Padmākara (distinct from Padmasambhava); and Marpa Lotsāwa Chökyi Wangchuk (1012–1097), the founder of the Kagyü lineage, who with the monk-translator Prajñākīrti made a further revision against a central Indian (literally "central-country") manuscript. This double-translation and revision history is typical of the tantra translation enterprise of the second diffusion of Buddhism in Tibet.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
