The Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter (Śrī Vajracaṇḍacitta Guhyatantra Uttarottara)

Toh 460 in the Kangyur is a tantric scripture known in Sanskrit as the Śrī Vajra Caṇḍacitta Guhyatantra Uttarottara and in Tibetan as the Dpal rdo rje gtum po thugs gsang ba'i rgyud phyi ma'i phyi ma, meaning in English "The Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter." It belongs to the class of Buddhist tantras and concerns the wrathful deity Vajra Caṇḍacitta, a fierce manifestation associated with the yakṣa Wrathful Vajra-in-Hand, addressing themes of malicious forces, poisons, and the harm caused by hostile beings in a degenerate future age. The text unfolds as a dialogue set before the Blessed One, in which Wrathful Vajra-in-Hand rises from the assembly to describe beings who torment others through the poisons of touch and breath. As the "Latter of the Latter," it presents itself as a concluding or supplementary tantra within a sequence of related texts in this cycle of the Kangyur.

In the language of India: Śrī Vajra Caṇḍacitta Guhyatantra Uttarottara. In the language of Tibet: The Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter. Homage to the Blessed One, the Glorious Wrathful Vajra.

Then from within that assembly, a yakṣa named Wrathful Vajra-in-Hand rose from his seat, placed his right knee upon the ground, and with half-closed eyes expressed intense reverence beyond his own ordinary conduct, and addressed the Blessed One with these words:

Kyai! Blessed One, in the time to come there will be malicious sentient beings who harm others and cause beings to suffer in three ways. By the poison of touch they will torment them most severely. By the poison of breath they will cause extreme intoxication and great heaviness. By the poison of sight they will consume, plunder, and burn. In order to dispel the torment of those who emit the poison of breath and those afflicted by the bodily poison of touch, I entreat the Blessed One to give teaching.

At this request, the Blessed One declared in verse:

Hear this, yakṣa, lord of secrets.
The three poisons and the root of poison
are indeed arisen from the three poisons.
The root poison has no intrinsic nature.
That itself is the supreme medicine for poison —
the medicine arises of itself, not from another.
That very thing liberates from self and other.
When the root poison is self-liberated,
the three poisons and all the rest do not exist elsewhere.
The poison of the five elements, arising from the five poisons,
destroys what arises merely on the conventional level.
To utterly vanquish all of these,
the nectar of self-and-other self-liberation
vanquishes the root poison and the rest.
The form of the deity and the power of mantra,
together with the great gnosis element,
vanquish the karmic elements.
And by means of substances, it is likewise.

Thus was it declared.

From the Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter: the first chapter, on poison and what vanquishes poison.

Then the Wrathful Yakṣa addressed the Blessed One thus: Kyai! Blessed One, for the ripening of those great poisons, by what actions is their removal to be performed? Please instruct with care.

The Blessed One declared:

Vajre sarvāṣṭaṃ citta rbaḍ nan. Mahākāla citta rbaḍ nan. Sarva śatrūṃ māraya rbaḍ nan.

This is to be performed for twenty-one days. At sunrise each morning, one thousand times, and likewise at dusk, at dawn, and at midnight. Sprinkle with the three menstrual bloods, with poison of various kinds, and with fierce substances. Having fashioned a nāga (serpent spirit) form and placed it within a clay vessel, inside the form breathe the syllable Hūṃ and encircle it with a garland of mantra. In the vessel, press a great amount of ash into a cavity. The mantra practitioner with the root maṇḍala should then cover it with a black smoky cloth. Thereafter perform a fierce fire offering.

Thus was it declared.

From the Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter: the second chapter, on the life-wheel of the malicious one.

Then it was further declared:

Upon the surface of the nāga form as the object of touch,
arrange the syllables of mantra as though the letters were mantra themselves.
Having placed the forms of the four nāga kings at the border,
rotate the malicious activity wheel.
First peaceful, fierce at the end;
first fierce, peaceful at the end;
peaceful and fierce at both beginning and end.

Oṃ nāgarāja samaya, apālāya citta jvalaya, samaya svāhā.

With twenty-one repetitions bring it to conclusion, thus was it declared.

From the Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter: the third chapter, on the samaya life-wheel and the mantra of the gentle and the fierce.

Then again the Wrathful Yakṣa addressed: Kyai! Blessed One, for the time to come, please grant teaching on the common activity of subduing those who harm the Dharma and those who are malicious.

The Blessed One then declared:

For the common outer activity of killing if one desires it: turn the immutable wheel. Insert it into the wheel and apply it to the effigy. The secret wheel is to be placed facing the belly. Draw in blood the effigy of whoever is visualized as the target. Write the name at the heart, at the navel write śarīrate, and at the head place the words bhandha bhandha. The fourth limb is hana, mārayā is at both thighs and at the private parts. Take impure substances from the ground of the one visualized, mix them with donkey's urine, and arrange the syllables of the word śatrūṃ and the effigy together. Bind them with blue and red, and fiercely activate them with poisonous and fierce substances. Send it to a prison and bring down the sessions. Over the course of one month cause it to darken. At intervals spin it round seven by seven times. Perform the offering activity and bring down the midnight session. Seal the extremities by burning and pressing.

Thus was it declared.

From the Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter: the fourth chapter, on the immutable wheel of enlightened activity.

Then again the Wrathful Yakṣa addressed: Kyai! Blessed One, for the time to come, please grant teaching on the means of destroying the crops of those who are violently difficult to tame.

The Blessed One then declared:

For performing the activity of destroying crops, torment and destroy the nāga — thus were spoken the four syllables of power and the three syllables of the immutable:

Oṃ hūṃ vajra mahābala.

Thus was spoken the mantra of the wrathful one of great power.

Nāga citta rbad nan — thus were spoken the six syllables that pierce the nāga's heart.

Sarva duṣṭāna — thus was spoken the drawing of all under one's power.

Phob śar śar phob — thus was spoken the essence of frozen water.

Gather them together and strike. Having arranged the mantras together with the nāga effigy, strike with white mustard seed and apply with a phurba. Place the nāga effigy inside a leper's skull. Strike with great blood, the fierce poison of musk deer's blood, white mustard, black mustard, and mantra-wood. Draw the nāga effigy forth from the water of the nimba tree. For those who desire a great display of miracles at the outset, perform the subjugation activity when it is debilitated. When it sits dead in a corpse, it will have slipped its time and will not move. When signs have appeared, oneself being endowed with meditative absorption, fold up the nāga effigy with fierce mantras, press the substances and skull upon a spring, and combine with the time when the fierce one moves abroad. There is no doubt it will turn the world upside down.

Thus was it declared.

From the Glorious Tantra of the Secret Mind of the Wrathful Vajra, the Latter of the Latter: the fifth chapter, on frozen water and the means of destroying crops.

Then all the arrogant ones were filled with very great rejoicing. They stood there trembling, as trees stirred by a fierce seasonal wind, calling out that they would act according to the commands, and remained in the presence of the assembly. Then the Wrathful Yakṣa addressed: Kyai! Blessed One, for the sake of upholding the Dharma in times to come, please bring down the essentials of activity.

The Blessed One then declared:

For engaging the māras in activity: kha rag nag po khrā māya nṛmāra jā mṛkhug jaḥ.

For engaging the btsan spirits in activity: āpi śu rakṣa tsalpa tsalpa anṛtṛ jaḥ jaḥ.

For engaging the nāga-btsan spirits in activity: nāgarāja śul a tṛ jaḥ jaḥ māra ya nṛ lo sod.

For engaging the kings in activity: trotani trotani patra patra śūla śūla dha śa grīva māra ya nṛ jaḥ jaḥ rbad.

For engaging the nāgas in activity: nāga gurliṅ, snyingkhrag bam rul, nāga ra ra he sa tad rbad, pudu ma śi kha la rakṣa rbad.

For engaging the gnyan spirits in activity: u ta kha kha da ra singga rakṣa kha la ni dun māraṇa dun rbad jaḥ.

For taking their effigy-forms into activity: jala jini hana nṛ madu, snyingkhala nṛ jaḥ jaḥ, ja nṛ rbad pukhal rakṣa rbad.

Roll up the liṅga with a sorcery-cord. Then place it inside a black horse's skull. At the base of a black cliff in the western direction, bind together the appropriate substances and a name-tag.

Take the hearts of a black horse and a black sheep, adorned with dark-blue and black silk. Place them in a black horse's skull and set it at the edge of a cliff. Write the name-tag of the target, smear it with poison, roll it up in dark-blue silk, and insert it into the skull of a dzo. Take the heart and effigy of a red cow and a red horse, place a red food-offering into the skull, and set it at the base of a spring-cliff. At its peak, where there is a red cliff, press it down. Write the name and lineage and roll it up under food. Into a monkey's skull made into a cap, roll up the hearts of a horse, a bird, and a white sheep together with an effigy, wrap the eyes of a Śyen-bird and mixed grains, place them into the skull, and press it beneath the threshold of a temple. Write the enemy's name onto the belly of a black toad, roll it into the horn of a red bull. Pour medicinal herbs, grains, and precious substances into the red bull's horn, and hand it into the grasp of a wrathful nāga. Insert a name-tag into the skull of a dzo-hybrid. Place the effigy of a water-horse together with the heart of a blue horse into the skull and throw it into the ocean. Into the skull of a red jackal, roll the enemy's name and effigy in red silk, bind it tight with a dark red cord. Place the hearts and effigy of a red bird and a red goat into the skull along with a red food-offering. Press it down at the base of a red cliff in the northern direction. Write out the name-tag of the one you intend to harm and insert it into the skull of a blue jackal. Insert also the skull of a yak-hybrid calf, then press it down at the bank of a river or at the root of a solitary tree. Through meditative absorption, mantra, and the ritual substances, apply yourself diligently to your own work.

Thus was it declared.

This is the sixth chapter of the Latter Tantra of the Secret Mind of Glorious Fierce Vajra — the chapter showing the full power of mantra in bringing harm to descend upon those who oppose the teaching.

Then the fierce yakṣa (yakṣa) made this petition: O Blessed One, in future times please grant instruction on the method for reversing the power of sorcery used by malicious beings who work with effigies.

Having been so petitioned, the Blessed One declared:

When you wish to reverse the power of another's sorcery,
conceal your own body,
and then scrape away the eyeballs of those persons.
To conceal your own body,
scrape the eyeballs of living creatures —
the fruit of the black khata tree
and the fruit of the rough-barked jackal-tree, two kinds —
anoint them on the eyes, then seek a precious stone.
Having found it, cut the body free and roam in mountain retreats.
If these are not to be found,
then gold, silver, stone, and the mineral zhanya-stone,
fatty tissue and the āruṛā fruit,
the bāruṛā fruit and pippali,
all parts of the male type in equal measure —
melt them down and be heedful of the steam and vapor.
If through the sorcery of another
you or someone else comes to be harmed,
scrape away the eyeball-fruit of all the proud ones.
The flesh of a serpent-like creature and the flesh resembling a frog,
a person who dwells in earth and water,
the fruit of the lamp-tree of the female yak,
smoke from unlit fire,
the great fragrance of the solitary one,
and all flesh from a being that died of natural causes —
prepare these carefully with diligent effort,
and the pure-visioned gods of the world
will not be able to see you.
To scrape away as the fruit of these
the malicious nāgas and the spirits that afflict,
take the five vital heart-parts of a rough-bristled male pig,
the golden vessel of the black magpie's tongue,
and obtain the vital essence of a wild she-yak's thigh —
when these are bound upon the body,
even if the eight great nāgas with their perfectly clear serpent-vision look upon you,
you will not be seen.

Thus was it declared.

This is the seventh chapter of the Latter Tantra of the Secret Mind of Glorious Fierce Vajra — the chapter on concealing the body.

Then the lord of the gods, Śakra (Indra), and the great commanders of the yakṣas — Vajrapāṇi the Fierce, Vajrapāṇi of the Blue Robe, the great commander Vajrapāṇi the Mighty, and the great commander Vajrapāṇi Lord of Secrets — together with the great assembly gathered there, were filled with great delight and offered praise and circumambulation a hundred thousand times, rejoicing with utmost veneration.

Then the Blessed One addressed the four Vajrapāṇis:
O you four Vajrapāṇis,

Wherever these tantras reside, follow them and honor the one who teaches these tantras with worship and veneration at all three times. Without exception, accomplish whatever purpose may be needed for that. In the future age they will spread widely in the land of Otreyul; guard and protect them there.

Having said this, he remained in the pure dharmadhātu, the basic space of phenomena.

This is the eighth chapter of the Latter-Latter Tantra of the Secret Mind of Glorious Fierce Vajra — the chapter on the complete entrustment.

The Latter-Latter Tantra of the Secret Mind of Glorious Fierce Vajra is complete.

Translated by the Indian master Apayuktila and the Tibetan translator Lawan Chökyi Tsöndrü.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The mantra strings in the second chapter are in corrupt or abbreviated Sanskrit mixed with Tibetan ritual terminology. The syllable "rbaḍ nan" is a Tibetan phonetic rendering of a mantra particle, not standard Sanskrit, and appears to function as an intensifier in the ritual register. These have been transliterated faithfully rather than reconstructed.

The phrase translated as "three menstrual bloods" refers to a standard tantric ritual ingredient category. The Tibetan "མ་ཁྲག་གསུམ" literally means "three mother-bloods," a technical term in fierce ritual contexts for a category of red substances used in wrathful rites.

The passage ends mid-sentence in the source text, cutting off after the Blessed One begins to speak. The translation preserves this truncation.  The ritual instructions throughout this passage contain a mixture of Sanskrit, hybrid Sanskrit, and what appear to be corrupt or deliberately coded mantra syllables. Several mantra strings such as nāga citta rbad nan, phob śar śar phob, and the longer spirit-engagement formulas resist straightforward Sanskrit analysis and may be transliterations of mantras that were transmitted phonetically in Tibetan without clean Sanskrit orthography. The syllables jaḥ, rbad, and similar forms are standard wrathful mantra seed-syllables and exclamation particles in the Mahāyoga tantric tradition, functioning as imperatives of compulsion or emission.

The term mdzephod, rendered as "leper's skull," literally means the skull of a person afflicted with leprosy, a specific tantric ritual ingredient.

The instruction that the target "sits dead in a corpse" most likely refers to the nāga effigy being understood as inanimate, having missed its operative window, though the Tibetan is terse enough that another reading, namely that the human target dies and enters a corpse-state, is possible.  The terms for plants and materials in the concealment formula are highly technical and some are obscure. "Khata tree" renders a term that may indicate a specific Himalayan botanical species whose precise identification is uncertain. "Zhanya-stone" is an unclear mineral name retained phonetically. "Rough-barked jackal-tree" is a tentative rendering of jackal-wood. "The lamp-tree of the female yak" is literally rendered and may refer to a specific plant used in ritual contexts. "The five vital heart-parts of a rough-bristled male pig" renders a specific anatomical enumeration whose exact referents in ritual medicine are uncertain. The phrase rendered "the vital essence of a wild she-yak's thigh" is a loose rendering of a compressed technical term. The passage ends mid-sentence as the source text breaks off at the chapter boundary, which is normal for this kind of tantra compilation.  "Otreyul" is a place name left in transliteration; its identification is uncertain and no standard Sanskrit or geographic equivalent is established in the available record. The colophon name "Apayuktila" is a reconstruction of an Indian master's name from its Tibetan phonetic rendering and may represent a variant spelling.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
