A One-Sided Examination of the King of Radiance, the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Awakened Buddha Who Thoroughly Purifies All the Lower Realms (Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tejorājasya Tathāgatasyārhate Samyaksaṃbuddhasya Kalvikadeśanā)

"A One-Sided Examination of the King of Radiance, the Tathāgata Who Thoroughly Purifies All the Lower Realms" is a canonical Buddhist sūtra known in Sanskrit as the Sarvaduṛgatipariśodhana Tejorarāja and in Tibetan as Dེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ངན་སོང་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱོང་བ་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བརྟག་པ་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་པ. The text belongs to the tradition of purification literature, centering on the luminous buddha figure known as the King of Radiance, whose enlightened qualities are celebrated for their power to cleanse beings of the sufferings associated with lower rebirths. Presented in the classical sūtra format — opening with the Buddha dwelling in a resplendent celestial grove filled with jeweled trees and many varieties of sacred flowers — the text unfolds as a discourse attributed directly to Śākyamuni Buddha. It is Toh 485 in the Kangyur, belonging to the general class of dhāraṇī-related or ritual purification sūtras within the Tibetan Buddhist canon.

In the language of India: Sarvaduṛgatipariśodhana Tejorarājasya Tathāgatasyārhate Samyaksaṃbuddhasya Kalvikadeśanā nāma.

In the language of Tibet: A One-Sided Examination of the King of Radiance, the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Awakened Buddha Who Thoroughly Purifies All the Lower Realms.

Homage to the Blessed One, the glorious Śākyamuni, Lion of the Śākyas.

Thus did I hear. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling in the Grove of All the Gods Supreme, a grove of Delight, beautified all around by trees adorned with jewels and golden leaves, branches, and creepers, by sandalwood trees, by medicinal herbs, and by flowers of many kinds — the kamal, the utpala, the karṇikā, the kkul, the tilaka, the aśoka, the māndārava, and the great māndārava, among other flowers of many varieties. It was perfectly adorned with wish-fulfilling trees, richly ornamented with diverse ornaments, filled with the sweet songs of many kinds of birds, resonant with the sounds of drums, the mukunda drum, the flute, the bhiri, and other instruments. Śakra (Indra, lord of the gods), Brahmā, and many divine children of various kinds sported there. It was a place blessed by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.

There in the midst of that great assembly — with all the gods including Śakra and Brahmā, with vidyādharas, with hundreds of thousands of tens of millions of divine maidens constituting his retinue, with yakṣas, rākṣasas, asuras, garuḍas, gandharvas, kinnaras, great serpents, nāgas, and many other retinues of various kinds — and with eight hundred thousand tens of millions of great bodhisattvas, namely the great bodhisattvas Matisāhasa, Matiakṣobhya, Mativistara, Sarvamati, Matyananta, Samantasuṣṭhumati, Matikamala, Mahāmati, Matidivyavasta, Matinānā, Matiniḥśeṣa, and Samantabhadra, together with their boundless and infinite retinues of irreversible great bodhisattvas who attended upon them, honored them as their superiors, made offerings to them and revered them, and regarded them as supremely excellent — the Blessed One, the great Brahmā, was seated upon a lotus throne in the midst of that vast gathering of the retinue, and he entered into meditative absorption called the Thorough Purification of All the Lower Realms.

At that very instant, from the curl of hair between his brows, a great bodhisattva known as the Liberator of the Continuum of the Three Lower Realms emitted and gathered back a garland of many rays of light, illuminating all the world-systems of the great trichiliocosm. By so illuminating them, he freed the minds of all sentient beings from the bonds of their mental afflictions, established them in the proper attainment of individual liberation, and caused the Grove of Delight also to be entirely illuminated. Then, with clouds of many kinds of offerings, having made offering and circumambulated one hundred thousand times, he bowed with his head, placed himself before the Blessed One upon a spotless jewel, and spoke these words:

How wondrous — the Buddha! How wondrous — the Dharma of the Buddha!
How wondrous — the deeds of the Buddha, so supremely excellent!
For it is by him that we have been thoroughly purified of all lower realms
and firmly established in the very conduct of awakening.

Then the Lord of the Gods, Śakra, circumambulated the Blessed One one hundred thousand times, bowed with his head in homage, and spoke these words to the Blessed One:

How wondrous, O Blessed One, that by the all-pervading light rays of the Buddha, beings have been thoroughly liberated from all lower realms and firmly established on the path of liberation. How wondrous is the Blessed One! How wondrous is the Sugata!

The Blessed One then declared: Lord of the Gods, this is not so wondrous. The buddhas, the Blessed Ones, have perfectly gathered accumulations of merit beyond measure. Lord of the Gods, the perfectly and fully awakened buddhas have become the very source of immeasurable qualities precious beyond reckoning. Lord of the Gods, the perfectly and fully awakened buddhas have brought skillful means to perfect and complete fulfillment, beyond all measure. Lord of the Gods, the wisdom of the buddhas, the Blessed Ones, is immeasurable. The conduct of the buddhas, the Blessed Ones, is immeasurable. The buddhas, the Blessed Ones, have made immeasurable beings who are suitable to be trained into proper vessels. The buddhas, the Blessed Ones, are possessed of a wisdom unequaled and equal to none. The buddhas, the Blessed Ones, are possessed of miraculous powers unequaled and equal to none. The buddhas, the Blessed Ones, are possessed of aspirational prayers unequaled and equal to none. Therefore, Lord of the Gods, know this: the buddhas, the Blessed Ones, work for the benefit of sentient beings in accordance with the vessels they are, they work for the benefit of sentient beings in accordance with the degree to which they are trainable, and they work for the benefit of sentient beings in accordance with their individual dispositions and inclinations. On this point, one should have no doubt, no hesitation, no wavering of mind whatsoever. That the Tathāgatas should fail to train those who are to be trained — such a thing is simply impossible.

Then the Lord of the Gods rose from his seat, made extensive and magnificent offerings to the Blessed One, bowed in homage, and addressed the Blessed One with these words: For the benefit of all sentient beings, for their sake with affectionate care, for the sake of compassion, for the sake of great love, and for the fulfillment of all aspirations — Blessed One, I beseech you to grant me confidence. Sugata, I beseech you to grant me confidence. Blessed One, from this assembly of the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, a divine son named Jewel of Unstained Light has died and passed on; he has reached the age of seven, beyond his allotted time. Blessed One, I beseech you to prophesy where he will be reborn and what happiness or suffering he will experience. Sugata, I beseech you to prophesy.

The Blessed One declared: Lord of the Gods, if you know this is the right time and the proper occasion, then listen. The Lord of the Gods said: Blessed One, this is indeed the time. Sugata, this is indeed the proper occasion.

The Blessed One declared: Lord of the Gods, that divine son named Jewel of Unstained Light, upon dying and passing from here, will be reborn in the great Avīci hell. There he will experience fierce and unbearable suffering for twelve thousand years. After that, he will experience suffering in the lesser hells for ten thousand years. After that, he will be reborn among animals and hungry ghosts and will experience suffering there for ten thousand years. After that, he will be reborn in a remote border region among people who are deaf, mute, and dumb by nature, and will experience suffering for sixty thousand years. After that, for eighty-four thousand years he will be afflicted with diseases that cause pus and blood to flow, with leprosy, and with blindness —

they will be despised by many people, abandoned by all, and will fall into a lowly station, passing without cease from one suffering to the next. They will also bring harm to others and will without cease create manifold karmic obscurations. Again and again they will experience one stream of suffering after another.

Then, upon hearing this, Śakra (Indra, king of the gods) and the other sons of the gods were struck with fear and alarm, became despondent, and fell face-down to the ground. They rose again and spoke these words: "Blessed One, how will they be freed from that continuum of suffering? O Sugata, how will they be freed? Blessed One, please protect them entirely with whatever skillful means will deliver them from that great mass of suffering. O Sugata, protect them entirely."

The Blessed One declared: "O lord of the gods, Śakra — eighty-four hundred thousand buddhas have taught this, and I too shall teach it. Listen well."

Then the lord of the gods, Śakra, again made offerings to the Blessed One with māndārava blossoms, great māndārava blossoms, flowers of many kinds, precious crowns, bracelets, armlets, earrings, long necklaces, half-necklaces, and many other excellent ornaments. He circumambulated him many hundreds and thousands of times, paid homage, and then, with words of "Excellent!" — "Blessed One, excellent! Sugata, excellent!" — expressed his delight. He then made this request: "Blessed One, please teach this well, for the benefit and happiness of the world together with its gods, and so that sentient beings of future times may be fully liberated from the continuum of the three lower realms."

Then the assembly of gods headed by Brahmā likewise spoke these words: "Blessed One, excellent! Sugata, excellent! Please teach this so that future sentient beings who merely hear even the name of it may be freed from the path of the three lower realms, and — whether reborn in the divine world of the higher realms or in the human world — may attain unsurpassable, perfectly complete awakening."

Then the Blessed One, in order to bestow blessing upon those sons of the gods — Śakra, Brahmā, and the rest — through this heart-essence of all Tathāgatas, entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra Blessing of Amogha, the blessing that is not overcome.

Oṃ vajrādhiṣṭhāna jñāna samaye hūṃ.

Having thus entered that meditative absorption, and having been blessed by that Vajra Blessing which cannot be overpowered, the Blessed One then drew forth this heart-essence of the Tathāgata called the King Who Thoroughly Purifies All Lower Realms.

Oṃ śodhane śodhane sarva pāpaṃ viśodhane śuddhe viśuddhe sarva karmāvaraṇa viśuddhe svāhā.

The very instant this dhāraṇī was proclaimed, all sentient beings were prevented from falling into the lower realms, and every being in the destinies of hell, of animals, and of hungry ghosts was purified. Their unbearable sufferings were utterly calmed, and the many beings were endowed with happiness.

Then he further proclaimed this protective heart-essence:

Oṃ śodhane śodhaya sarva apāyan sarva sattvebhyo hūṃ.

"O lord of the gods, further — this too is the heart-essence of all Tathāgatas:

Oṃ sarva apāya viśodhane hūṃ phaṭ.

"O lord of the gods, further — this is the near heart-essence of the heart-essence of all Tathāgatas:

Oṃ trāṭ.

"O lord of the gods, further — this is the heart-essence that thoroughly purifies all lower realms:

Hūṃ.

"O lord of the gods, further — to speak briefly, this is what easily and completely liberates even those sentient beings of little merit from every continuum of the lower realms, by the mere act of calling it to mind:

Namo bhagavate sarva durgati pariśodhana rājāya tathāgatāya."

Arhatē samyaksaṃbuddhāya. Tadyathā: Oṃ śodhane śobhane viśodhane viśodhane sarva pāpaṃ viśodhane śuddhe viśuddhe sarva karma āvaraṇa viśuddhe svāhā. This is the root mantra.

Oṃ sarva vittsarvāvaraṇa viśodhaya hana hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ sarva vidyā svā hūṃ. Oṃ sarva vid hrīḥ phaṭ. Oṃ sarva vid āḥ. Oṃ sarva vid trāṭ. Oṃ sarva bdi oṃ. Oṃ sarva bdi hūṃ. Oṃ sarva vid kriṃ trāṭ. Oṃ sarva padmi hā vajrodbhava dāna pāramitā pūje hūṃ. This is the mantra of the Lady of Grace.

Oṃ sarva pidma hā vajrodbhava śīla pāramitā pūje trāṃ. This is the mantra of the Garland Lady.

Oṃ sarva vidma hā vajrodbhava kṣānti pāramitā pūje hrīḥ. This is the mantra of the Song Lady.

Oṃ sarva badmi hā vajrodbhava vīrya pāramitā pūje āḥ. This is the mantra of the Dance Lady.

Oṃ sarva baddsi rbā pāya viśodhani dhama dhama dhūpaya dhyāna pāramitā pūje hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Incense Lady.

Oṃ sarva biddsa rva durgati pariśodhani kleśo va kleśaccheni puṣpa vilokini prajñā pāramitā pūje trāṃ hūṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Flower Lady.

Oṃ sarva baddsi rbā pāya viśodhane jñānāloka kāri praṇidhāna pāramitā pūje hrīḥ hūṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Lamp Lady.

Oṃ sarva biddsa rbā pāya gandha vināśani vajra gandhopāya pāramitā pūje āḥ hūṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Perfume Lady.

Oṃ sarva biddsa rba naraka gati mbakarṣaṇi hūṃ jaḥ la phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Vajra Hook.

Oṃ sarva biddsa narakoddhāraṇī hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Vajra Lasso.

Oṃ sarva vidyā sarvāpāya bandha mocani hūṃ baṃ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Vajra Iron Chain.

Oṃ sarva bhiddsa rbā pāya gati gahana viśodhane hūṃ hoḥ phaṭ. This is the mantra of the Vajra Bell.

Oṃ maitrī haraṇāya svāhā. This is the mantra of Maitreya.

Oṃ amogha amogha darśani hūṃ. This is the mantra of Amoghadarśanī, She of Meaningful Sight.

Oṃ sarvāpāyaṃ jaha sarvāpāya viśodhani hūṃ. This is the mantra of She Who Draws All Beings from the Lower Realms.

Oṃ sarva śoka tamo nirghātana mati hūṃ. This is the mantra of Intellect That Utterly Destroys All Sorrow and Darkness.

Oṃ gandha hastini hūṃ. This is the mantra of the Fragrant Elephant.

Oṃ śūraṃ game hūṃ. This is the mantra of She Who Moves Bravely.

Oṃ gagane gagana locane hūṃ. This is the mantra of the Treasury of Space.

Oṃ jñāna ketu jñāna vati hūṃ. This is the mantra of Jñānaketu, the Wisdom Banner.

Oṃ amita prabhe amita vati hūṃ. This is the mantra of Amitābha, Boundless Light.

Oṃ candra sthe candra vyāvalokini hūṃ svāhā. This is the mantra of Candraprabhā, Moonlight.

Oṃ bhadra vati bhadra pāle svāhā. This is the mantra of Bhadrapāla, the Noble Guardian.

Oṃ jāli mahā jālini hūṃ. This is the mantra of Luminous Brilliance.

Oṃ vajra garbhe hūṃ. This is the mantra of Vajragarbha, Vajra Essence.

Oṃ akṣaye hūṃ hūṃ. Akṣaya karma āvaraṇa viśodhane svāhā. This is the mantra of Inexhaustible Wisdom.

Oṃ pratibhāne pratibhāna kūṭe svāhā. This is the mantra of the Summit of Eloquence.

Oṃ samanta bhadre hūṃ. This is the mantra of Samantabhadra, the All-Good.

These are the mantras of the bodhisattvas, the great beings, of the Auspicious Aeon, set forth in order. By means of these, practising daily at the morning hour — meditating on the generation stage in accordance with the ritual sequence described in the tantras, and striving in the three supreme samādhis of deity yoga — one will accomplish the complete purification of the lower realms.

O lord of the gods, further — this secret heart-essence of the Tathāgata, the Glorious King Who Thoroughly Purifies All Lower Realms — if a son of good family or a daughter of good family —

— should merely hear the name of it, or retain it, or read it, or even write it out and wear it on the crown of the head, the hair-knot, the shoulder, or the throat, then in that very lifetime all eight untimely deaths, and all those dreams connected with death, and every such omen connected with the lower realms, shall not occur even as dreams.

And if anyone enters a maṇḍala properly, receives empowerment, recites the heart-essence, and meditates on the meaning of the mantra — how much more need be said of what they gain! Not even the slightest sin shall approach them, and they shall not go to the lower realms.

If the corpses of any beings whatsoever — men, women, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, animals, hungry ghosts, hell-beings, and so forth — are placed within the maṇḍala and given empowerment, then even if such a being has been born in hell, they shall be liberated from that very moment and shall take birth in the lineage of the gods. Having been born in that divine lineage, they shall directly realize the nature of reality of all the Tathāgatas and shall become irreversible. Their stream of being shall become certain, and they shall be fully born into the lineage of all the Tathāgatas. Having completely abandoned all obscurations, they shall experience happiness whether born in the lineage of the Tathāgatas, in the lineage of the gods, or elsewhere. In brief, O lord of the gods, they shall experience every benefit and happiness, both worldly and transcendent.

Then the lord of the gods circumambulated the Blessed One as before, paid homage, and spoke these words: Blessed One, I pray that you teach the Dharma for the benefit and happiness of those who have fallen under the power of all the lower realms, and in order that sentient beings may turn their backs on all the lower realms, and that they may easily realize the unsurpassed and perfectly complete awakening.

Then the Blessed One Śākyamuni entered the meditative absorption called the Vajra of Wisdom That Completely Purifies All Lower Realms, and all the Tathāgatas proclaimed the great maṇḍala called the Glorious King Who Completely Purifies All Lower Realms. And this, which was spoken by the Protector Śākyamuni himself, is as follows.

First, the yogin should take a seat that is soft and very comfortable in a solitary place agreeable to the mind, in a spot removed from ordinary people. Having arranged a maṇḍala with fragrant substances, one should make offerings of the five enjoyments. Then one meditates on all phenomena as selfless. One visualizes oneself, by means of the syllable HŪṂ, as a blazing vajra like a sun of fire. At its throat, from the syllable HRĪḤ, arises a lotus; above it, at the tip of the petals, from the syllable A, a lunar disc; above that, from HŪṂ, a five-pointed vajra. That vajra dissolves into the tongue, this being called Vajra-tongue — from which one's tongue becomes a vajra-tongue and one becomes capable of reciting the mantra.

Between the two palms, from the white syllable A, a lunar disc arises; above it, from HŪṂ, a five-pointed vajra. Both dissolve into the palms of the hands, so that the hands become vajra-hands and one becomes capable of binding the seals.

Then one should visualize the protective wheel, recite "OṂ GṚHṆA VAJRA SAMAYA HŪṂ PHAṂ," and bind the wrathful Tiri-Tiri:

With the vajra clasped, fingers inward,
the thumbs pressing firmly over them like vajras,
covered with a wrathful mind —
the wrathful Tiri-Tiri binding.

Then, seated on the vajra-half-seat posture, having bound the vajra Tiri-Tiri, one receives and holds the empowerment of the vajra-rosary:

"OṂ VAJRA JVĀLĀ NĀLĀRKA HŪṂ ABHIṢIÑCATU MĀṂ" — thus the empowerment of the vajra-rosary is received.

From the vajra-binding: the two thumbs are rubbed together and raised upright; they are held covering the top of the vajra-binding — this is the vajra Tiri-Tiri.

Having armed oneself with the armor of the two syllables OṂ and ṬUṂ, one proclaims "OṂ VAJRA JVĀLĀ NĀLĀRKA HŪṂ," places the left vajra-fist at the heart, shakes the right vajra-fist vigorously, and strikes against all obstructing forces.

Then, with the mudrā of the vajra-fire, one burns the obstructing forces, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA JVĀLĀ NĀLA HANA DAHA PACA MATHA BHAṂJARA ṆAHŪṂ PHAṬ." The vajra-binding is clasped inwardly with the fingers interlaced inward, blazing on the inside, and the two thumbs are raised upright as vajras — this is the mudrā of the vajra-fire.

Following that, with the mudrā of VAJRA NETRĪ BANDHA SARVA VIGHNA DĪNA, one binds all obstructing forces. The vajra-binding is clasped, and the two thumbs are extended straight out and held level — this is the mudrā of the vajra-eye.

The vajra-binding is extended and placed on the ground, and one binds below, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA DṚḌHO ME BHAVA RAKṢA SARVĀṂ SVĀHĀ."

With the mudrā of the wrathful-eye vajra, one binds above, reciting: "OṂ HULU HULU HŪṂ PHAṬ." Both vajra-fists are clasped, swung in a circle like a sickle-wheel of fire, and held above the crown of the head — this is the mudrā of the wrathful-eye vajra.

After that, with the mudrā of the vajra-yakṣa, one again binds above, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA YAKṢA HŪṂ." The two palms are joined with both thumbs extended and the two index fingers made to resemble fangs — this is the mudrā of the vajra-yakṣa.

With the mudrā of the vajra-uṣṇīṣa, one binds the eastern direction, reciting: "OṂ DRŪṂ BHANDHA HŪṂ" — also simply "DRŪṂ." The two vajra-fists, with the little fingers linked in a chain, the two index fingers joined tip to tip and bent back, are placed on the crown of the head — this is the mudrā of the vajra-uṣṇīṣa.

Again, with the vajra-lasso, one binds that same eastern direction, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA PĀŚA HRĪḤ." Both vajra-fists are knotted at the wrists — this is the mudrā of the vajra-lasso.

With the vajra-banner, one binds the western direction, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA PĀTĀṂKE PĀTĀṂ GINI RAṬA." From the vajra-binding, the two thumbs are crossed in the posture of the bodhisattva's sitting, the two index fingers are rubbed together flat and then spread apart, and the little fingers are made to flutter like a banner — this is the mudrā of the vajra-banner.

All obstructing forces in the directions, the intermediate points, above, and below are to be utterly eliminated.

With the vajra-kāla, one binds the northern direction, reciting: "HRĪḤ VAJRA KĀLI RUṬA MAṬA," and the mudrā of the vajra-yakṣa is displayed at the heart — this is the mudrā of the vajra-kāla.

With the vajra-peak, one binds the southern direction, reciting: "OṂ VAJRA ŚIKHARE RUṬA MAṬA." Both vajra-fists are held in the manner of lifting a mountain — this is the mudrā of the vajra-peak.

With the vajra of action, one binds the maṇḍala and makes the enclosure, reciting: "HŪṂ VAJRA KARMA."

Again, with the vajra HŪṂ-maker, one accomplishes the inner consecration, reciting "HŪṂ." Both vajra-fists are clasped, the two vajra-wrists are crossed, the two little fingers are linked like iron hooks, and the two index fingers are raised as threatening fingers — this is the vajra HŪṂ-maker, called "Victorious over the Three Worlds."

From that same position, with the index finger and middle finger made into the form of a vajra — this is the mudrā of the vajra of action.

With the vajra-binding, one bestows the vajra-tent, using: "VAJRA BANDHA PĀṂ."

Then, with the mudrā of the vajra-wheel, one completes before oneself the maṇḍala that thoroughly purifies all lower realms of existence.

OM VAJRA VIRVAJRA CAKRA HŪṂ — so it is called.

With the two vajra-fists bound together,
the index fingers and little fingers in the vajra-binding —
this is renowned as the vajra-wheel,
the accomplisher of all maṇḍalas.

By turning this in all directions with a clockwise rotation, all maṇḍalas will be manifested. Holding this mudrā at the mouth and gazing at it with steady attention, one recites the mantra of the vajra-wheel eight times. By this one will enter into all maṇḍalas.

Then, taking the offerings of flowers and the like and mentally perceiving them as though directly before one's eyes, one makes full and proper offering. And in all directions one makes the fivefold prostration with this mudrā, saying: OM SARVA VIDYĀ KĀYA VĀK CITTA PRAṆAMENA VAJRA VANDANAṂ KAROMI.

Then one makes the fourfold prostration as follows. With the whole body, and with the vajra-palms fully outstretched, one prostrates toward the east, saying: OM SARVA VIDHŪ JOPASTHĀNĀYA ĀTMĀNAṂ NIRYĀTAYĀMI. SARVA TATHĀGATA VAJRASATTVA ADHIṢṬHA MĀṂ.

Then, rising in the same manner, one places the vajra-palms at the heart and prostrates toward the south, touching the forehead to the ground, saying: OM SARVA VIDHŪ VAJRĀBHIṢEKĀYA ĀTMĀNAṂ NIRYĀTAYĀMI. SARVA TATHĀGATA VAJRARATNA ABHIṢIÑCA MĀṂ.

Then, rising in the same manner, one places the vajra-palms upon the crown of the head and prostrates toward the west, touching the chin to the ground, saying: OM SARVA VIPŪJĀ PRAVARTANĀNAṂ NIRYĀTAYĀMI. SARVA TATHĀGATA VAJRADHARMA PRAVARTAYA MĀṂ.

Then, rising in the same manner, one brings the vajra-palms down from the crown of the head, places them at the heart, and prostrates toward the north, touching the crown of the head to the ground, saying: OM SARVA VIPŪJĀ KARMAṆE ĀTMĀNAṂ NIRYĀTAYĀMI. SARVA TATHĀGATA VAJRAKARMA KURU MĀṂ.

Then, placing both knees on the ground, one holds the vajra-palms at the heart and confesses all misdeeds individually. All buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, all Tathāgatas, and all those who dwell in the families of vajra, jewel, lotus, and action, together with all essences, mudrās, mantras, knowledge-holders, and deities — I beseech you all to take heed of me. I, so-and-so by name, in the presence of all buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, of all Tathāgatas, and of all those who dwell in the families of vajra, jewel, lotus, and action, together with all essences, mudrās, mantras, knowledge-holders, and mantra-deities — before all of these I confess each and every misdeed individually.

To all buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions — past, future, and present — and to all pratyekabuddhas, and to the noble śrāvakas who have gone rightly forth and those who have rightly entered the path, and to the entire community of sentient beings — I rejoice greatly and abundantly in all their merit.

I entreat all Blessed Ones, the buddhas of the ten directions who have not yet turned the wheel of Dharma, to turn the wheel of Dharma.

I supplicate all Blessed Ones, the buddhas of the ten directions who intend to pass into complete nirvāṇa, not to pass into nirvāṇa.

Then, forming the mudrā of flowers, one recites the following: OM SARVA VIDHŪ SPHAPŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, forming the mudrā of incense, one recites the following: OM SARVA VIDDHŪPA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, forming the mudrā of lamps, one recites the following:

OM SARVA VIDĀ LOKE PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, forming the mudrā of scent, one recites the following: OM SARVA VIṄGANDHA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, forming the mudrā of hollow cupped palms pressed together, one recites the following: OM SARVA VIDODHYAṂ GARATANĀLĀṄKĀRA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

OM VIDDHĀSYA LĀSYA RATI KRĪḌĀ SAUKHYA ANUTTARA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

OM SARVA VIDA ANUTTARA BODHYĀLAṄKĀRA VASTRA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, having called to mind all the sufferings of saṃsāra, one forms the karma mudrā of the Blessed One Vajrasattva. Moved by compassion, in order to liberate all sentient beings, one generates the awakening mind, saying:

In order to liberate those not yet liberated, to free those not yet free, to bring relief to those not yet relieved, to lead to complete nirvāṇa those who have not yet passed completely beyond sorrow, and to fully liberate, from the ocean of saṃsāra, all sentient beings without exception, I generate the mind of awakening.

OM SARVA VIDYĀ VAJRA BODHI CITTA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Then, forming the mudrā of the enchantress, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be perfectly endowed with all requisites and abundance, and may each receive whatever they desire.

OM SARVA VIDMAHĀ VAJRODBHAVA DĀNA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the garland woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be entirely free from all extremes of non-virtuous action of body, speech, and mind, and may they be perfectly endowed with all extremes of virtuous action of body, speech, and mind.

OM SARVA VIDA ANUTTARA MAHĀ BODHY ĀHĀRA ŚĪLA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the song woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be endowed with bodies perfectly adorned with the major marks and minor features, may they always dwell in mutual fearlessness and without discord, may they be openly joyful at heart and in their sight, and may they be endowed with patience for the profound Dharma.

OM SARVA VIDA ANUTTARA MAHĀ DHARMA BODHI KṢĀNTI PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the dance woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be fully endowed with bodhisattva conduct, supremely inclined toward buddhahood itself, and endowed with the diligence to completely abandon saṃsāra.

OM SARVA VITSĀRA PARITYĀGA ANUTTARA VĪRYA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the flower woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be free from all afflictions and secondary afflictions, and may they be perfectly endowed with meditative concentration, liberation, meditative absorption, meditative attainment, clairvoyance, knowledge, and all masteries.

OM SARVA VIDA ANUTTARA SAUKHYA VIHĀRA DHYĀNA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRASPHĀRAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the incense woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be perfectly endowed with worldly and transcendent wisdom and gnosis, may they perfectly attain the four specific discriminating knowledges, may they know all crafts and treatises, and may they master arts, techniques, and rituals.

May they attain the wisdom that directly perceives suchness and perfectly cuts through all afflictive and cognitive obscurations.

OM SARVA VIDA NUTTARA KLEŚA CCHEDA SARVA DHARMA SAMANTA JÑĀNA MAHĀ PRAJÑĀ PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SPHARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the lamp woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be freed from every wrong descent.

OM SARVA VITSTARVĀ PĀ YA VIŚO DHANI JÑĀNA ĀLOKA PRAṆIDHĀNA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SPHARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Forming the mudrā of the perfumed water woman, one recites the following: May all sentient beings be freed from all unknowing.

OM SARVA VITSTARVĀ YA GANDHA VINĀŚANI VAJRA GANDHOPĀYA PĀRAMITĀ PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SPHARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

For the purpose of bodily veneration, one makes the fervent aspiration that one has oneself gone into the presence of all the Tathāgatas of every world-realm in the ten directions without exception.

OM SARVA VIDKĀ YA NIRYĀTANA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Everywhere, with mouths of a hundred tongues, one makes the fervent aspiration of engaging in praises such as the hymn called "Unequaled, Unmoved," and the like.

OM SARVA VIDBĀ GNIR YĀTANA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SMARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

With the yoga of the single intent of all bodhisattvas united, one makes the fervent aspiration in the equanimity of all phenomena.

OM SARVA VIDCI TTA NIRYĀTANA PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SPHARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Making the fervent aspiration that all phenomena are of the nature of non-substantiality, emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness:

OM SARVA VINGUHY A PŪJĀ MEGHA SAMUDRA SPHARAṆA SAMAYE HŪṂ.

Having thus perfectly made offerings to all the Tathāgatas with these twenty forms of offering, one surrenders oneself, saying: I offer myself to all the buddhas and all the bodhisattvas. At all times and in every way, I present myself individually for your acceptance. O protectors possessed of great compassion, I beseech you to bestow upon me the attainment of the great sacred commitment.

These roots of virtue are to be shared in common with all sentient beings. By these roots of virtue, may I and all sentient beings be freed from every misfortune, worldly and transcendent. May we be perfectly endowed with every excellence, worldly and transcendent. And may we, who are the highest among humans, become buddhas in this very life through joy and mental happiness.

By these my virtuous actions,
may awakening swiftly come within the world.
Teaching the Dharma for the benefit of beings,
may I liberate sentient beings tormented by manifold sufferings.

Having dedicated this to unsurpassable, perfect, complete awakening, one takes up the vows:

Just as the protectors of the three times
have unfailingly committed themselves to awakening,
so I too shall generate the unsurpassable,
supreme awakening mind.

The threefold training in moral discipline —
the discipline of virtue, the discipline of gathering the Dharma,
and the discipline of benefiting sentient beings —
each of these I shall firmly uphold.

The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha,
the supreme Three Jewels, unsurpassed —
the vow that arises from the yoga of buddhahood:
beginning from this day, I shall hold it.

In the gathering of the great vajra family,
the mudrā of the vajra and bell as well —
these I shall take up through suchness itself,
and the ācāryas too I shall uphold.

In the supreme family of the great precious jewel,
for the sake of the pleasing samaya,
six times each day without fail,
the fourfold gift of generosity I shall fully bestow.

In the pure family of the great lotus,
for the arising of the great awakening,
the outer, secret, and three vehicles —
each of the sacred Dharmas I shall uphold.

In the family of the great karma,
endowed with all vows completely,
the activities of offering to the utmost of my ability —
all of these, one by one, I shall uphold.

For the sake of benefiting all sentient beings,
the unsurpassable awakening mind —
the supreme and authentic bodhicitta — I have generated,
and, having taken up every vow without exception,
I shall liberate those not yet liberated,
I myself shall free those not yet free,
I shall bring relief to those not yet relieved,
and I shall place sentient beings in nirvāṇa.

Thus it is said.

Then, with intensified devotion, one imagines the deities and so forth making offerings to the maṇḍala of space, offering by means of the five enjoyments and so on. Having properly made offerings, one praises the qualities of the Blessed One:

How wondrous! O buddha, O buddha!
The supreme and excellent deeds of a buddha!
Having thoroughly purified all the lower realms,
you act to bring sentient beings to awakening.

Then, making the gesture called the vajra añjali, one crosses the vajra-bond mudra at the heart, and recites: Om sarva-vid vajra-bandha trāṭ. One then seals the mudrā of the descent of the vajra and recites: Om tiṣṭha vajra dṛḍho me bhava śāśvato me bhava hṛdayam me adhitiṣṭha sarva-siddhi m me prayaccha hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ. Then: Om vajramuṣṭi bhaṃ. With the mind-mother vajra-bond: Om sarva-vit śodhane śodhane sarva-pāpa-m-avanaya hūṃ. Having firmly fixed the vajra-bond, with the second vajra mudrā, swiftly hurling it upward and outward, the supreme means of confessing transgressions.

Thus it is said.

Om sarva-vit sarvāpāya-viśodhane hūṃ phaṭ — this is the mantra for thoroughly purifying all evil.

Having firmly fixed the vajra-bond, one joins the thumbs together and presses the four corners one against the other, whereupon evil is swiftly expelled.

Om sarva-vita trāṭ hūṃ. With the mind-mother vajra-bond: Om sarva-vit sarvāvaraṇa-viśodhani mune hūṃ phaṭ — this is the characteristic of the recitation.

Then, following that, the practitioner (yogin) meditates upon a lunar maṇḍala at the centre of the heart, arising from the syllable A, and upon it: Om mune mune mahā-munaye svāhā. Om namaḥ sarva-durgati-śodhane śodhane sarva-pāpaṃ viśodhane śuddhe viśuddhe sarva-karmāvaraṇa-viśuddhe svāhā. Through these, the maṇḍala that thoroughly purifies all the lower realms is perfected in full.

Then, having drawn in the deities by means of the vajra-hook and so forth, one invites them in, binds them, brings them under one's power, and introduces them into the space maṇḍala — whereby the two maṇḍalas become one single maṇḍala. From having become the yoga of perfection, the deities of the samaya maṇḍala are fully perfected. In the centre of that maṇḍala, one meditates upon one's own nature as a wheel-turning form — as the lion of the Śākyas. Then in the heart of Śākyamuni, one meditates upon a lunar maṇḍala arising from the syllable A, and in the centre of that lunar maṇḍala: Om mune mune mahā-munaye svāhā. Following that, one emanates the maṇḍala by the karma mudrā of the vajra-element: Om sarva-vid vajra-cakra hūṃ. With the mind-mother vajra-bond, using the two middle fingers of that very hand one takes up the rosary, and with samaya hūṃ one mentally enters. That rosary is then placed upon one's own head, and with pra-tīccha vajra hoḥ it is secured. Then, with it fixed upon one's own head: Om pratigṛhṇa tvam imaṃ sattvam mahā-bala.

The blindfold is now removed with this: Om vajrasattva rang-nyid de — you are Vajrasattva himself; strive to open your eyes; the vajra eye is unsurpassed; all eyes will be opened. And with: He vajra-pāśa.

Then one gazes into the great maṇḍala for as long as the Blessed One Śākyamuni remains present. Next, the mind-mother vajra-bond is released at the heart, and empowerment is conferred from the vase consecrated by vajra blessing, given by the vajra fist: Om sarva-vidyā vajra abhiṣiñca.

Then one seals with the mudrā of the Lady Sovereign of Vajra Space (Vajradhātvīśvarī) and the rest: Om sarva-vidyā vajra-dhara tiṣṭha vajriṇī hūṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ. Om sarva-vidyā vajra vajriṇī hūṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ. Om sarva-vidyā ratna vajriṇī hūṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ. Om sarva-vidyā dharma vajriṇī hūṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ. Om sarva-vidyā karma vajriṇī hūṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ. Om ṭuṃ vajra tuṣya hoḥ.

Armoured in the armour of the two syllables, one then receives for oneself the vajra empowerment:

By the empowerment of the vajra of all the buddhas,
today you are empowered.
This is itself all the buddhas —
receive it, for it is the supreme accomplishment of the vajra.

Om vajrādhipati stvaṃ abhiṣiñca mi tiṣṭha vajra samaya stvaṃ — vajra-nāmābhiṣekata. Om vajrasattva staṃ abhiṣiñca māṃ.

This is itself all the buddhas,
dwelling in the hand of Vajrasattva.
You too must hold it always;
firm in the conduct and vow of Vajrapāṇi.

Om sarva-tathāgata-siddhi vajra samaya tiṣṭha eṣa stvaṃ dhārayāmi vajrasattva hi hi hi hi hūṃ.

Om sarva-vidyā vajrādhiṣṭhāna samaye hūṃ — this is the mantra of self-consecration.

Both vajra fists are sealed, with the thumbs, middle fingers, and little fingers raised and joined at the tips, while the index fingers and ring fingers are crossed in the bodhisattva cross-legged posture — this is the vajra mudrā. With it one consecrates the heart, the throat, the forehead, the ūrṇā hair-whorl, the space between the eyebrows, the nose, the ears, the waist, the knees, the feet, the shoulders, both eyes, and the secret place.

Then, upon one's own body — with the samaya syllable Aḥ, one arouses the pride of being the essence of all marks arisen from the seed of the lunar maṇḍala born from the syllable A — and one recites three times: Om sarva-vidyā dṛśya jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ samaya stvaṃ samaya hoḥ. Om mune mune mahā-munaye svāhā. This also is the common rite.

Then, upon one's own body, one seals with the vajra-gathering mudrā, recites Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ, and having drawn in and inserted the deities into their respective places, seals and brings them under dominion.

At one's own heart the syllable Hūṃ —
joined into the five-pointed vajra by the conjunction —
this is declared to be the samaya mudrā
of Śākya Sengge, the Lion of the Śākyas.

Abiding in the centre in supreme meditative absorption —
that is declared to be the samaya mudrā.
The vajra-bond is firmly sealed,
the two middle fingertips joined.

The vajra mudrā, so vowed,
is the vajra uṣṇīṣa mudrā.
That very middle finger in the jewel form,
that very middle finger in the lotus form,
from that same middle finger in the vajra form
the remaining fingers are made to flare.
Those same fingers thus flaring —
this is the uṣṇīṣa splendour mudrā.

From that same mudrā: the ring fingers and the two thumbs are level and raised, the index fingers are petals of the lotus, the middle fingers raised as vajras, and being placed forward — this is done in the manner of the vajra-net.

At the heart, the thumbs are level,
fully extended — this is the rosary mudrā.
The palms joined are drawn from the mouth,
performing the dance with palms joined at the crown.
The vajra-clasp is given downward,
the well-joined palms are scattered upward,
the thumbs levelled and fully clasped,
fully extended — this is the anointing.

Both vajra fists are sealed —

The index fingers, thumbs, and middle fingers — each one facing its counterpart — are to be grasped pointing forward. One index finger is slightly bent. The two thumbs are tied in a knot. The thumbs and index fingers are interlaced and bound. The tips of the vajra fists are pressed together. At the throat, in the maṇḍala of the lotus-moon, the Dharma mudrā is to be fully contemplated. By means of the mantra of extraction described earlier, this is explained to be the Dharma mudrā. At the heart, the variegated vajra is visualized, and the action mudrā is performed. The wheel of Dharma as described is the mudrā of the King of the Śākyas. Earth-touching, supreme giving, meditative absorption, and fearlessness-granting and so forth, in due sequence — abiding in supreme meditative absorption is the mudrā of the resplendent uṣṇīṣa. The right hand holds a staff at the hip, the left raises a sword at the heart. The left raises the threatening gesture of the index finger, while the right is lifted and extended. Both arms gathered together in dance form the arrangement of the parasol. Whatever the ritual of the Dharma mudrā — even that which is not of the fully awakened buddhas who are protectors — by the practice of binding with the vajra and with the intention of imputation, one performs the bow. Binding the rosary and drawing it from the mouth, encircling it entirely in dance — by the practice of the vajra fist, incense-offering and so forth are likewise applied. The index finger is fastened as a hook, on the little finger a great iron chain. The wrist is knotted and the two index fingers interlaced, while the backs are also firmly pressed together. Then from that, in due sequence, the characteristic marks of the one who holds the action mudrā of the great self, the bodhisattva, are fully and correctly explained. The two vajra fists are bound and rubbed against each other, and the index fingers and middle fingers are drawn in to grasp a flower — this is the mudrā of Maitreya. The left fist is placed at the hip, and directly opposite the level of the right shoulder the index finger and middle finger are extended and placed in the manner of an eye — this is the mudrā of Amoghapāśa (the Lord of Unfailing Capture). The two vajra fists are bound and the index fingers extended. The right, placed well as a hook, is the one that clears away all lower rebirths. The left fist is placed at the hip, and the right, resembling a staff, is raised upward and placed — this is the one that destroys all the darkness of grief. The left fist is placed at the navel, and the right hand placed in the manner of an elephant's trunk — this is the mudrā of the fragrant elephant. The left fist is placed at the hip, while the right hand is placed in the manner of holding a sword — this is the mudrā of going valiantly. The left fist is placed at the heart. The right hand circles upward to the sky-treasury, and with the two vajra fists bound as though bearing a victory banner, it is placed to the right side — this is the mudrā of the wisdom pinnacle. Both hands placed as though holding a vase — this is the mudrā of Amitābha. The left fist is placed on the thigh, and to the side of the right fist the thumb and little finger are extended — this is the moonlight of the crescent moon. Both hands at the heart, opening in the form of a lotus with their tips joined to each other — this is the mudrā of Samantabhadra. The two vajra fists are bound as though bearing armor and placed properly at the two breasts — this is the mudrā of the light with a net. The left fist is placed at the hip, and with the right placed at the heart, the middle finger raised — this is the mudrā of the vajra essence. The left fist is placed at the heart, and the right performs the gesture of fearlessness — this is the mudrā of Inexhaustible Wisdom. The left fist is placed at the navel, and the right hand makes the gesture of the back of the hand — this is the mudrā of the stacked braveries. The left fist is placed at the hip,

and the right makes the jewel fist — this is the mudrā of Samantabhadra. It has been taught as the activity mudrā according to the rite that is free from signs.

At the heart one should hold the actual form of the five-pointed vajra, and in the acts of bestowal one holds it thus — those who bear the mudrās and signs.

Taking up the vajra-bell, holding the vajra at the heart — this is called the great mudrā (mahāmudrā), the awakening of the great bodhisattva nature. In the acts of bestowal one holds it thus — those who bear the mudrās as weapons.

Whatever the great masters may be, having bound whatever mudrā with whatever other, one should recite the essence-mantra of the true meaning and meditate upon one's own nature.

The one who accomplishes the four mudrās, for the purpose of sealing all the deities, perfecting the qualities of omniscience, accomplishing the benefit of all sentient beings, thoroughly purifying all the lower realms, and bringing all sentient beings to awakening — for these purposes the supreme mantra is now to be explained.

In the maṇḍala that purifies all the lower realms, through the supreme union of mudrā and mantra all activities become efficacious. Having performed the vajra dance individually, step by step, one should recite the mantras.

Oṃ namo bhagavate sarvaduṛgatipariśodhanārājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyaksambuddhāya tadyathā oṃ śodhane śodhane sarvapāpaṃ viśodhane śuddhe viśuddhe sarvakarmaāvaraṇa viśuddhe svāhā.

With the left vajra fist one takes up the vajra-bell, and with the right hand, holding the vajra and making it dance, one strikes the vajra and recites these words:

Vajra vācanā ṭakki hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ jaḥ.

One raises it to one's own heart and holds it through the union of clarity, and recites: ṭakki jaḥ hoḥ.

Then one is to establish stability through the hundred-syllable mantra. By these practices one becomes like a bodhisattva who is master of the tenth ground. Having contemplated them, one worships with all offerings. Then, by means of the praises of those, one is to worship perfectly.

You who turn the wheel of Dharma,
who purify all the lower realms
of every being in the three realms —
to you, Śākya Lion, I bow.

From the intrinsic nature of the dharmadhātu,
for the benefit of all sentient beings,
you who reveal your own suchness —
to you, Vajra Uṣṇīṣa, I bow.

Through meditating on the suchness of equality,
conferring empowerment upon all beings
dwelling in the three realms —
to you, Jewel Uṣṇīṣa, I bow.

By nature possessed of individual discriminating wisdom,
raining down the nectar of Dharma
and granting relief to all sentient beings —
to you, Lotus Uṣṇīṣa, I bow.

To pacify the suffering of sentient beings,
by nature accomplishing activity in accordance with deeds,
performing the manifold enlightened actions —
to you, Variegated Uṣṇīṣa, I bow.

Illuminating the three realms with light,
causing all sentient beings to behold
the truths of the noble ones —
to you, Uṣṇīṣa of Brilliant Splendor, I bow.

Bearing the victory banner of the wish-fulfilling jewel,
through generosity fulfilling completely
every aspiration of all sentient beings —
to you, Uṣṇīṣa Victory Banner, I bow.

Cutting through afflictions and secondary afflictions,
subduing the power of the four māras,
bringing sentient beings to awakening —
to you, Sharp Uṣṇīṣa, I bow.

Adorned with the white parasol
for all beings in the three realms,
you who have attained the sovereignty of Dharma-kingship —
to you, Uṣṇīṣa White Parasol, I bow.

The goddess of beauteous garlands and song,
the four dancing goddesses,
the goddesses of incense, flowers, lamps, and perfume —
to you all, I bow.

Those born from the essential nature of faith and so forth,
who dwell in the midst of the four gates,
bearing hook, lasso, chain, and bell —
to you gatekeepers, I bow.

Those who dwell in the galleries on each side of the four gates —

Those twelve who dwell beginning with Supreme Joy —
to you bodhisattvas, I bow.

Brahmā, Indra (Śakra), the fierce one, the Moon, and the rest,
those who protect the world in the four directions,
Fire, the rākṣasa lord, the Wind god,
and the lord of spirits —
to you all, I bow.

With this king of praises,
having praised all in the presence of the maṇḍala,
let the mantra-holder who bears the vajra and bell
recite these praises properly.
Then, from the outside inward, upon one's own body,
let one introduce oneself fully into the maṇḍala.

This, then, is the samādhi called the Preparation for the First Maṇḍala, to be cultivated with certainty as described.

Next, what is called the Supreme King of Maṇḍalas shall be fully expounded.

Oṃ a-kāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmāṇām ādyan-utpannatāt.

The meaning of this is as follows: from liberation, one should ardently bring to mind all world-systems in the ten directions as empty, in terms of the sixteen aspects of emptiness, and regard the self-grasping ego as emptiness.

Then, from the syllable Hūṃ, a perfect vajra arises as the maṇḍala of wind. Above that, the syllable Raṃ gives rise to the maṇḍala of fire. Above that, from the syllable Vaṃ arises the great ocean. Above that, from the syllable Kaṃ arises the golden maṇḍala. Above that, in the center, comes the syllable Hūṃ Suṃ Hūṃ — from which one generates the four-sided Mount Meru, jewel in its intrinsic nature, adorned with all precious things, and consecrates it with the mudrā of the vajra-fist together with the formula Oṃ vajra-dṛḍho and so forth.

Above that, from the karma mudrā of the vajra lineage, from the white syllable Bhruṃ, arises a four-sided celestial palace with four gates, furnished with vajras, jewels, and jeweled pinnacles,
adorned in every part with four stairways,
in all four sides and galleries,
at the gates and their thresholds and every border,
ornamented with moon-discs, marks, and vajras,
adorned with lattice-work and half-lattice,
complete with bindus,
and ornamented with banners and flower garlands.

The inner maṇḍala is a wheel with eight spokes, entirely encircled by a vajra garland. At its hub is a lion throne. Above that is a moon disc. Within the eight spokes of the wheel are moon discs — the abodes of the deities. The abodes of the deities of the outer maṇḍala are on the panels, where twenty-eight moon discs are to be visualized. On the moon disc atop the lion throne, the syllable A and so forth, and the syllable Ka and so forth — the syllables of wisdom and method — dissolve, and entering into the samādhi that pervades space, and taking on the form of a mantra that embodies the complete cause for the benefit of sentient beings in the nature of awakening mind, one recites:

Oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā.

Through this mantra, glorious Śākyamuni is fully perfected — this is the samādhi of entering into equipoise that dispels all obscurations.

Then, the mudrā and mantra of the buddha, the Blessed One, who has entered into samādhi, are to be explained. Binding the two vajra fists together, one opens them gradually and apart. The mudrā of the wheel of Dharma is that which severs all of saṃsāra.

The analogy for this is as follows:
Just as bees and other creatures
that have become attached to a lotus
and are trapped within it —
when the lotus petals open,
they are freed from the suffering of captivity,
so too are those bound in the suffering of saṃsāra,
wandering in the three realms of existence,
liberated from their bonds
by the compassionate Lion of the Śākyas.

Then, at the heart of glorious Śākyamuni, from the syllable A there arises a moon disc. Upon that moon disc, all the mantras are to be generated, beginning with Vajra Uṣṇīṣa (Skt. uṣṇīṣa), and proceeding through to the end of Vajra Descent. Then the mantras arise:

Oṃ namo bhagavate sarvaduṛgatipariśodhanarājāya, tathāgatāya, arhate samyaksaṃbuddhāya. Tadyathā: oṃ śodhani śodhani, sarva pāpaṃ viśodhane, śuddhe viśuddhe, sarva karmāvaraṇa viśuddhe svāhā.

This mantra is to be recited without fail.

Then, following on from that, the sequence is to be explained correctly in order:

Oṃ vajra hūṃ phaṭ.

Issuing forth through the gateway of the syllable Va,
rays of light in fivefold brilliance stream out in all directions,
illuminating the ten directions everywhere.
They liberate all sentient beings
from their every suffering.
Then the rays of light return
and dissolve into the heart center.
After that, the mantra and the rays of light mingle together;
the body born of action becomes completely perfect.
Upon the eastern spoke of the inner maṇḍala wheel,
on a lotus and moon disc, resides
the Tathāgata Vajra Uṣṇīṣa.
Arisen from the heart center for the benefit of all sentient beings,
his body is white and blazing with rays of light,
and he abides in the earth-touching mudrā (gesture of touching the earth).

In this way, the emission and withdrawal of light rays,
as described before, together with the practice
of emission and withdrawal,
perfectly mingles mantra and rays of light,
generates and completely perfects the body,
and one should dwell in that natural state.

By means of oṃ ratnottamatrāṃ, the invocation is made.

Upon the southern spoke,
abiding on a lotus and moon disc, is
the Tathāgata Ratna Uṣṇīṣa.
Arisen from the heart center,
he is perfectly adorned with the major marks of a buddha,
his body is blue and exceedingly beautiful,
and his supreme mudrā is that of supreme giving.
May he confer empowerment upon all sentient beings
of the three realms without exception.
Following the sequence described before of emission, withdrawal,
and the stages of generating the form,
the invocation is made by means of oṃ padmottama hrīḥ.

Then, dwelling on the western spoke,
upon a lotus and moon disc maṇḍala,
the Tathāgata Padma Uṣṇīṣa,
fully perfected through seed-syllable and rays of light,
arises from the heart center
and abides as the one who demonstrates perfect guidance.
He blazes with the radiance of lotus ruby,
and abides in the mudrā of meditative concentration.
Invocation is made by means of oṃ viśvottama aḥ.

On the lotus of the northern spoke,
above it on the moon disc maṇḍala,
drawn forth from the heart center, is the buddha
the Tathāgata Viśva Uṣṇīṣa.
His body is green and blazing with light,
and his mudrā bestows fearlessness.
Through his mudrā he performs manifold enlightened activities,
liberating sentient beings from saṃsāra.
By the syllable Oṃ, the buddha is invoked.

The Tathāgata Uṣṇīṣa Tejas
dwells in the southeast direction on a lotus,
upon a perfect moon disc maṇḍala.
His right hand holds the sun,
his left hand rests at his hip.
By the radiance of his body, white-red in color,
he illuminates the three realms.
He is born from the seed-syllable Hūṃ.

The Tathāgata Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya
arises from the heart center,
and dwelling on the spoke free of the extreme of truth,
he arises from one's own moon-form.
His body is red-dark in color;
he holds the victory banner of the wish-fulfilling jewel.
He purifies the miserliness of sentient beings.

The Tathāgata Uṣṇīṣa Tikṣṇa,
perfected from the seed-syllable Dhīḥ,
cuts through afflictions and secondary afflictions.
He is drawn forth upon the spoke of wind.
He abides upon a lotus and moon,
and his emblems are a sword in his right hand
and a book in his left.
His body is blue like the sky.
He abides on a lotus upon a moon disc.

The Tathāgata Uṣṇīṣa Chattra,
arisen from the seed-syllable Trāṃ,
is the lord of Dharma for all sentient beings.
He is to be invoked upon the powerful spoke.
His color is like jasmine,
and his emblem is a white parasol.
All these dwell on various lotuses,
abiding upon moon disc maṇḍalas.

Oṃ trāṃ hrīḥ aḥ.

After reciting these mantras,

from the heart center as well, they are drawn forth, and at the four intermediate directions, upon lotus and moon maṇḍalas, stand the four goddesses beginning with the Graceful One (Skt. Lāsyā). Their body colors correspond to their families: white, yellow, red, and variegated. Then the binding of the mudrās is performed just as previously described. After reciting those very mantras, they too are drawn forth from the heart center. The four goddesses beginning with the Incense Offering Goddess abide on lotuses upon moon maṇḍalas, at all four intermediate directions. In each case the body color follows in the order of the family.

Oṃ sarva saṃskāra pariśuddha dharmate gagana samutgate svabhāva viśuddhe mahānaya parivāre svāhā.

Having invoked them with the mantra, at the two flanks of the eastern gate there abide the four figures beginning with Maitreya (Loving-Kindness), upon lotus and moon maṇḍalas. All sit in the bodhisattva's cross-legged posture, and their mudrās and body colors are as follows in order.

Maitreya, whose mind is perfectly pure, has a golden body radiant with excellent rays of light. His right hand holds a nāga-tree blossom, and his left hand holds a water-vessel.

The second is Amoghādarśana (Seeing the Meaningful). His body is golden, blazing with rays of light. His right hand holds a lotus with an eye upon it, and his left hand rests at his hip.

The third bodhisattva is named Durgativiśodhana (He Who Destroys and Vanquishes the Lower Realms). His body is white, blazing with radiance. His emblem is an iron hook held in his hand.

The fourth is Viniścitamati (Intellect That Thoroughly Overcomes the Darkness of Sorrow). His color appears as a mixture of white and yellow. His emblem is a staff held in hand. His left hand is in a fist resting at his hip, and he sits in the bodhisattva's cross-legged posture.

These four bodhisattvas are well established at the southern gate.

The first is Gandha Hastī (the Incense Elephant). His body color is white tinged with blue. His mudrā: the right hand holds a conch filled to the brim with perfume, and the left hand is in a fist at his hip. He thoroughly purifies all obscurations.

The second, whose name means Courageous One, liberates from all afflictions. His color is like crystal, radiant with excellent light. His mudrā: he holds a sword in his hand. His left hand rests at his hip, and he pacifies the suffering of sentient beings.

The third is Ākāśagarbha himself (Treasury of Space). He is adorned with all ornaments, his body radiating a color blended of white and yellow, and he has abandoned all obscurations. His mudrā: the right hand holds the treasury of Dharma resting upon a lotus, the left hand is at his hip, and he is the bearer of all the wealth of space.

The fourth is Jñānaketu (Banner of Wisdom). He fulfills all wishes. His color is a clear and vivid blue. He bears the victory banner of the wish-fulfilling jewel. His left hand is in a fist at his hip, and he liberates beings from the suffering of poverty.

Near the western gate, upon lotuses and moon maṇḍalas, the first is called Amṛtaraśmi (Rays of Nectar). He is beautifully adorned in the color of the moon. He holds a nectar vase properly in hand, and with his hand holds a jeweled crown. His left hand is in a fist at his hip, and he is the one who bestows vast life.

The second bears the epithet Candrābhā (Moonlight) and dispels the darkness of ignorance. His body color is a beautiful white. His mudrā: the right hand itself holds the moon resting upon a lotus. The left hand is in a fist at the hip.

The third is called Surakṣita (Well-Guarded). His color is white tinged with red. He makes all phenomena perfectly clear. His mudrā: the right hand properly holds a blazing jewel. The left hand is in a fist at the hip.

The fourth bodhisattva bears the emblem of a net of light rays. His body color is a blazing red. He holds a vajra canopy.

At the base of the northern gate, upon lotus and moon maṇḍalas, the very first son of the buddhas is named Vajragarbha.

His color is white tinged with blue. His mudrā: the right hand holds an utpala lotus bearing a vajra. The left hand is in a fist at the hip.

The second is named Buddhi (Wisdom-Mind). He possesses inexhaustible, fully perfect liberation. He shines throughout like the orb of the moon. His mudrā: the second hand properly holds a wisdom vase and satisfies all sentient beings completely.

The third son of the buddhas bears the name Accumulated Eloquence. His body color is a blazing red. His mudrā: the right hand rests upon a lotus holding a mass of jewels. The left hand is in a fist at the hip.

The fourth son of the Victors is called Samantabhadra. His body color is a blazing golden yellow. The mudrā of his right hand holds a jeweled sheaf of grain. The left hand rests in a fist at the hip.

These bodhisattvas, endowed with such forms, are themselves the very embodiment of loving care. This is the meditative absorption called Supreme Maṇḍala King.

Oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā.

Namas sarva-durgati-pariśodhana-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyaksambuddhāya. Tadyathā: oṃ śodhane śodhane sarva-pāpaṃ viśodhane śuddhe viśuddhe sarva-karmāvaraṇa-viśuddhe svāhā.

Through this mantra, one meditates completely on the thirty-seven deities beginning with the King of the Śākyas.

Then, after that, one should invite the wisdom maṇḍala. With mantra and mudrā together, having opened the door, one binds both hands into vajra fists, fully extends the two index fingers, curls the little fingers into a chain-link form, and with the door-opening mudrā recites: Oṃ sarva-vidyā-udghaṭaya hūṃ. With the door-opening mantra and mudrā, one opens the door.

With the vajra-wheel mudrā one fully lifts the maṇḍala. Oṃ sarva-vidvajra-cakra hūṃ. One binds the palms with the vajra, and by the vajra-hook of liberation, the Glorious King of the Śākyas, the lord of union, gathers all the buddhas together. By striking with the left-hand hook, the striking is accomplished in equality. With the right hand one also strikes. Both together serve as the gathering.

Oṃ vajra-samājaḥ jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ.

When this summons is proclaimed, the assembled retinue of the wheel of all the buddhas will come. If all the buddhas themselves arrive in this way, what need is there to speak of others entering?

Then, gazing upon the maṇḍala-wheel in the sky before one, one thoroughly purifies with scented water contained in the vessel of the offering-water, using the mantra of Vajrayakṣa, and presents the rinsing water for the mouth. Then, with the mudrā of the offering-water, one presents the offering-water. Then, with the mudrā of the foot-washing water, one presents the foot-washing water.

Then: Vajra-puṣpe hūṃ. Vajra-dhūpe hūṃ. Vajra-dīpe hūṃ. Vajra-gandhe hūṃ. With the mudrā of Vajrayakṣa one drives away the obstructing forces and grants entry into the maṇḍala.

Then, beginning with the first mudrā, one binds the samaya mudrās from the previously described assemblage of mudrās. Then, with the mantras described earlier, one performs the rite of the Dharma mudrā. Then, with the mantra of the karma mudrā, one binds the karma mudrā. Then, with the mantra of the great mudrā, one accomplishes the great mudrā.

Then, the Tathāgatas beginning with Vajrauṣṇīṣa emit the Vajra-of-Mind consort, the Jewel-Vajra consort, the Dharma-Vajra consort, and the Karma-Vajra consort, and they confer empowerment upon the glorious deity of the maṇḍala together with its assembly, beginning from the King of the Śākyas and extending to the ultimate reaches of the vajra descent. The five empowerments are conferred, as well as lordship, that is, the final attainment of the ten grounds.

Immediately upon conferring the empowerment, one recites:

Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-dhūpe-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṃ.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-puṣpa-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṃ.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-dīpa-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṃ.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-gandhe-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṃ.

Then the four goddesses beginning with the Graceful One make offerings. One sharpens the vajra, and preceded by the Hundred-Syllable Vajra mantra, one offers praise as before.

Then one recites this praise:

Those who are matchless, immovable, bearing the qualities of the matchless essence,
whose very nature is compassion, who dispel the suffering of beings —
who bestow all excellent qualities and siddhis without limit:
the stainless, immovable, supremely matchless, bearing the highest Dharma —
even in the finest fraction of the supreme qualities, none can compare.
There is nothing that could serve as an example equal to space.
I supplicate those who grant supreme attainment to the realm of sentient beings.
For the boundless siddhis, beyond all example and all form,
arising from the force of the hundredfold stainless compassion —
whose nature is realized aspiration, whose nature is unobstructed Dharma,
who are endowed with boundless sovereignty, ever diligent in accomplishing the benefit of beings —
the nature of great compassion ever manifestly radiating,
whose activity of unobstructed compassion is unwavering,
who bestow the supreme siddhi upon the three worlds:
in you who are completely perfect, utterly perfect beyond measure and reckoning —
even as you depart to the abode of bliss, how wondrous is the excellent nature of reality!
You who ever bestow what is supreme, you who proceed as those gone to bliss,
who bestow the supreme attainment upon all three worlds without exception,
you Sugatas who traverse the three times, who possess no obscuration —
grant me the supreme siddhi, the supreme gift of the three supreme samayas.

Having recited this, one cultivates the intention to offer praise with a hundred tongues to all, and praises them while holding the vajra and bell.

Then one presents the torma (ritual cake) together with all offerings and the torma rite with its requisite articles, to all the Tathāgatas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, and to all the worldly and supramundane outer deities. One recites the verses of Noble Shoulders.

At the outset, with sounds such as the cymbals and so forth, with the mudrā of the Victor over the Three Realms, one summons the heap of misdeeds. Endowed with the three syllables and the rest, throughout the entire world-realm without exception, one equally eliminates all misdeeds. The drawing-in, the summoning, and the binding utterly destroy.

The four mantras, properly applied, are as follows:

One first praises oneself and the others, and strikes the mustard seeds at the outset. To wash excellently the bones of the dead in cloth: with the mantra beginning Oṃ śodhane and so forth, the defilements of the three realms of existence are washed away with water. With the mantra beginning Oṃ kaṃ kani and so forth, one washes with the five kinds of cow-products. With the mantra beginning Oṃ ratne ratne and so forth, one washes with all manner of fine fragrances. With the mantra beginning Oṃ amogha āvaraṇa and so forth, one washes with cow's milk. With the mantra beginning Oṃ amite amite and so forth, one washes also with the finest beer. With the mantra beginning Oṃ puṇye and so forth, one washes again and again with water in between.

Again one takes up the auspicious song, confers the empowerment, and purifies the path.

For the incense and the rest, these are the mantras of the four goddesses.

Then, in the fire pit of this rite, approximately one cubit in size, one performs the fire offering. Calling to mind the sentient beings who dwell throughout all the lower realms, in order to restore their virtuous continuum, to pacify their misdeeds, and to purify their obscurations, one burns the offering. Mixing together butter, milk, honey, rice, mustard seeds, sesame, grains, and fruits and so forth, one offers them with both hands into the wood. The various other activities of the rite one performs just as before. By this, sentient beings quickly attain the fullness of perfect happiness.

This is the meditative absorption called Supreme King of Karmic Action.

By performing these rites for those sentient beings, they will be fully liberated from the sufferings of hell and will be born in the realm of Tuṣita in the presence of the Sugata who works for the benefit of all sentient beings. Then, the gods together with Indra (Śakra), accompanied by renown, dance and perform, and in order to offer worship to the Tathāgata in this very life through boundless clouds of mantra offerings, the hosts of gods are to be placed in front. Having aroused the awakening mind, one fills the grove of joy entirely with divine flowers, incense, butter lamps, fragrant substances, parasols, victory banners, pennants, and various other offerings, and adorns it as well with many ornaments, fine garments, and rains of precious jewels and the like. Then wonder arose greatly.

This concludes the first chapter of the Examination of the Tantra known as the Glorious King Who Thoroughly Purifies All Lower Realms, the single-chapter Examination.

Then the Blessed One, through his blessing, caused the great bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi to speak the subsequent chapter of the examination of the king of mantra texts. The hero rose from his seat and, with joy, polished the vajra and, having paid homage to the joyful lord of the Śākyas, the Mighty One of power and delight, he entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra that Thoroughly Purifies All Obscurations, and from his own heart he drew forth this very essence-mantra called Thoroughly Purifying All Lower Realms:

Oṃ sarva pāpaṃ dahana vajra hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva pāya viśodhana vajra hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva karma varaṇa nibhasmī kuru hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ bruṃ vināśaya sarvāvaraṇāni vajra hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ druṃ viśodhaya sarva varaṇani hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ jvala jvala dhaka dhaka hana hana sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sruṃ sara prasara prasara sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ hūṃ hara hara sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ hūṃ phaṭ sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ vṛta vṛta sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ traṭa traṭa sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ cchinda cchinda sarvāvaraṇāni hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ daha daha sarva naraka gati hetuṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ paca paca sarva preta gati hetuṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ matha matha sarva tiryaka gati hetuṃ hūṃ phaṭ.

Then, making use of the requisite implements for these, one recites:

Oṃ sarva pāpaṃ viśodhane dhama dhama dhūpaya hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva durgati viśodhane puṣpa vilokini hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarvāpāya viśodhani jñānāloka kari hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarvāpāya gati gandha nāśani gandha vati hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva naraka gati ākarṣaṇi hūṃ jaḥ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva naraka uddharaṇi hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva pāya bandhana vimocani hūṃ baṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ sarva pāya gati gahana vināśani hūṃ hoḥ phaṭ.

Then the maṇḍala is to be described. The inner maṇḍala wheel is most beautiful, with eight spokes, possessing a hub and a rim perfectly complete. Having drawn the inner tiers, at the hub one draws the lord of the Śākyas, the Mighty One. The great hero Vajrapāṇi, of vast power, is drawn in the presence of that hero. Behind him, the Wheel-Turner is likewise to be clearly depicted. To the right, draw the Victor's Uṣṇīṣa. To the left, draw the Completely Victorious One. The mass of splendor, as fire. The possessor of power, as a white parasol. Dispersion, as wind. The Completely Vanquishing One, draw as devoid of truth. Then draw the outer section perfectly: a square with four gates, with four stairways, most beautiful. Place the hero with hook, lasso, iron chain, and melodious bell. In all four corner directions draw incense and the rest.

Then, having anointed one's own body with garlands of flowers, perfume, and the like, the master is to be introduced. By means of the words "Jaḥ Hūṃ Vaṃ Hoḥ — Bhagavān, ehyehi, Mahākaruṇika, dṛśya hoḥ" — all the deities are invited. Likewise, once they have been introduced and empowerment is conferred, one is fully liberated from all the lower realms and comes to be born in higher states of existence — in the good destinies, in the heavenly worlds, and in the superior grounds. All accomplishments (siddhis) will likewise be attained. Perfect and complete buddhahood will without fail be obtained. All actions, as before, will be performed, and there will be no obstruction in anything whatsoever. Through the performance of purificatory ablution, one will be freed from all epidemics, harmful spirits, and the like. All actions are accomplished by means of Vajrapāṇi's syllable Hūṃ. Through the ritual method of another tantra as well, all actions will be accomplished. Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas (Skt. rākṣasa), and the like who have fallen under the power of the lower realms — by means of recitation, fire offering, and empowerment performed before images and the like of all those beings, they will be completely liberated from all the lower realms.

Then the Blessed One, Vajradhara (the Holder of the Vajra), gazed upon his face with a lion's gaze, paid homage, and spoke these words: "Blessed One, please teach the noble defining characteristics of the supreme mudrā. Bless all the victorious ones of the mind who are moved by the anguish of compassion."

Abiding in meditative absorption, one joins the palms at the forehead and pays homage. This is the mudrā of homage to the buddhas. With the awareness of a yogin, one opens the palms in the direction of the throat in the form of a lotus. This is done. With the hands at the heart in the vajra-joined-palm position, with the tips of the middle fingers joined — this is the samaya mudrā (Skt. samayamudrā) of the vajra family (Skt. vajrakula).

Place the left hand flat in the lap facing upward, and upon it place the right hand reversed, with both thumbs joined, and gaze with a peaceful expression. This is the samādhi mudrā of the samaya of the Tathāgata family.

Wrap both hands around each other, interlacing them, and bind the little fingers and thumbs in a chain-link fashion, and place them at the heart. This is the samaya mudrā of the vajra family.

With the palms fully joined, the little fingers and thumbs brought together and held, and the remaining fingers fully extended — this is the lotus mudrā of the lotus family.

Having firmly sealed the vajra-fist, make the two middle fingers into vajra points, with the little fingers and thumbs fully extended. This is the mudrā of Vajrapāṇi.

With that same position, make the little fingers and both thumbs likewise, and form the index fingers and ring fingers in the shape of lotus petals. This is the mudrā of the king who thoroughly purifies all the lower realms.

With that same position, form the index fingers and ring fingers in the shape of a jewel. This is the empowerment mudrā.

With the little fingers and thumbs joined to their respective counterparts, and the remaining fingers fully extended — this is the mudrā of all weapons.

Extending the left hand in precisely the same manner — this is the mudrā of all actions.

Scattering the cupped hands upward — this is the mudrā of incense offering.

Scattering the same from below — this is the mudrā of flowers.

Holding both thumbs raised upward together — this is the mudrā of lamps.

Forming the same in the shape of a conch — this is the mudrā of perfume.

Fully extending and holding the same — this is the mudrā of the torma (ritual cake offering).

Inserting the middle fingers of the same inward — this is the mudrā of the arghya (water offering).

From the vajra-bound position, leveling both middle fingers without bending the knuckles, and extending all the fingers — this is the mudrā of dispersal.

From the same, bending both the thumb and the little finger — this is the mudrā of the Vanquisher.

The same, with the palms cupped in the shape of rays of light — this is the mudrā of the Mass of Splendor.

The same, rotated to rest at the crown of the head — this is the mudrā of the White Parasol.

From the two vajra fists, binding the thumbs and little fingers in a chain-link fashion and rotating — this is the mudrā of the Wheel.

From the vajra-bound position, forming both middle fingers into vajras and making the two index fingers like jewels, with the remaining fingers spread like rays of light — this is the mudrā of the Uṣṇīṣa of the Victor.

Likewise, forming the two index fingers into vajras and binding all the remaining fingers so they resemble a vajra — this is the mudrā of the Victorious One.

The right hand bestowing the supreme gift and the left bestowing fearlessness — this is the mudrā of the Tathāgata.

From the vajra-bound position, making the two index fingers resemble a vajra — this is the mudrā of the Vajra.

From the same, bending the right index finger — this is the mudrā of the Iron Hook.

From the same, forming it to resemble an arrow — this is the mudrā of the Arrow.

That same mudrā with the tips of the thumbs touching — this is the mudrā of Excellent Intellect.

The same without bending the middle knuckles — this is the mudrā of the Jewel.

The same with the fingers spread like rays of light — this is the mudrā of Splendor.

The same held at the crown of the head — this is the mudrā of the Victory Banner.

The same held out in front — this is the mudrā of Laughter.

The same formed to resemble a lotus — this is the mudrā of the Lotus.

The same with the middle finger and the index finger bent — this is the mudrā of the Sword.

The same formed to resemble a bracelet — this is the mudrā of the Wheel.

The same formed to resemble a lotus petal — this is the mudrā of the Tongue.

The same with the tips slightly extended — this is the mudrā of Variety.

The same with the tips greatly extended — this is the mudrā of Protection.

The same with both tips bent back — this is the mudrā of the Yakṣa.

The same firmly bent — this is the mudrā of Binding.

The same with the two index fingers bent — this is the mudrā of the Iron Hook.

The same with both tips touching — this is the mudrā of the Lasso.

The same knotted together — this is the mudrā of the Iron Chain.

The same shaken — this is the mudrā of the Bell.

Then the divine sons including Brahmā and Śakra (Indra) addressed the Blessed One, saying: "Blessed One, please teach, for the sake of, and for the benefit, happiness, and longevity of those with short lives and little merit. Please teach us, O Lord of Secrets."

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi, having looked upon that great retinue's maṇḍala including Śakra, Brahmā, and the rest, expressed his approval with the word "Excellent!" and said: "Excellent, excellent, O divine sons including Śakra — that such genuine confidence has arisen in you. Accomplish it well, and let it be taught!"

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi entered into meditative absorption into the samādhi called "The Vajra of Arising, Pervading All Things as Boundless as Amitāyus," and drew forth from his own heart this essence of all Tathāgatas — the incalculable accumulation of life, merit, and wisdom that causes increase — namely:

Oṃ puṇye puṇye mahāpuṇye aparamitāyuḥ puṇye jñānasaṃbhāropacite kariṇi svāhā.

He knew within himself that by the mere utterance of this dhāraṇī, the essence of all the Tathāgatas, all lower realms were utterly pacified, and all sentient beings born in the destinies of hell-beings, hungry ghosts, and animals were liberated. He illuminated all world-realms, and having illuminated them, he performed the twelve deeds of a buddha, and entered into the very Dharma-syllables of the essence of all the Tathāgatas.

Then once again the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called Vajra-Radiance of Infinite Life of all the Tathāgatas, and from within that absorption he proclaimed this heart dhāraṇī called the Vajra of Infinite Life of all the Tathāgatas:

Oṃ amite amitā amitoddhave amitasaṃbhave amitavikrānte amite vikrāntagāmini sarvakarmaśayakṣayaṃkari svāhā.

By the mere utterance of this, all the suffering of all sentient beings was utterly pacified.

Then once again the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Unfailing Vanquisher of All Obscurations, and from his own heart he drew forth this heart dhāraṇī called the Severing of All Obscurations of all the Tathāgatas:

Oṃ kaṃkani kaṃkani rocani rocani troṭani troṭani trāsani trāsani pratihana pratihana sarvakarmaparampārāṇi me sarvata svāhā.

By the mere utterance of this, all things were transformed in accordance with suchness.

Then once again the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra Free from All Obscurations, Unstained and Utterly Pure, and from his own heart he drew forth this heart dhāraṇī called the Complete Vanquishing of All Obscurations without Exception of all the Tathāgatas:

Oṃ ratne ratne mahāratne ratna saṃbhave ratnakiraṇe ratnamālāviśuddhe śodhaya sarva pāpaṃ hūṃ traṭ.

No sooner was this spoken than every abode of māras was struck down and utterly destroyed.

Then once again the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Unfailing and Indestructible Vanquisher of All Obscurations, and from his own heart he drew forth this heart dhāraṇī of all the Tathāgatas:

Oṃ amogha apratihatā sarvāvaraṇaviśodhani hara hara hūṃ phaṭ.

No sooner was this spoken than this entire world-realm shook and trembled and shook greatly, moved and stirred and moved greatly, quaked and heaved and quaked greatly, and many wonders and marvels appeared throughout the world.

Then the maṇḍala of those deities is as follows:

It is foursquare with four gates,
endowed with four sides and complete in every way,
fully furnished with four archways and passages,
with cornices and gate-arches adorning it.

At its center, the noble maṇḍala
of the wheel is to be drawn,
complete with four spokes,
with the finest hub-maṇḍala at its heart.

In the very center is the Protector,
Vajrapāṇi of great power,
bearing a vajra and a bell,
with a face as full as the moon and smiling — draw him so.

In the middle of the eastern spoke
draw as the principal figure Akṣobhya himself.
In the south, draw the Jewel one,
in the west, the Lotus born of water,
and in the north, he who is famed as the Unfailing one —
the heroic one of great power is to be drawn.

All the Tathāgatas are adorned
in the appearance of a wheel-turning monarch,
their complexions like the orb of the moon,
adorned with all manner of ornaments,
with hands in the gestures of supreme giving and fearlessness,
seated in the vajra cross-legged posture — draw them so.

In all the corner sections
likewise draw incense-offerings and the rest.
The gate-guardians also are to be drawn
as wrathful and supremely fierce.

Then the yogin himself enters in,
invites the deities of the mantra, and recites:

Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ bhagavān vajra ehyehi samayastvaṃ.

Then when the Protector has arrived,
one makes offerings in brief,
and with respect to the fear of the Lord of Death and the terror of serpents —

to overcome the Lord of Death, one causes entry with:

Oṃ vajra samaye hūṃ.

Vajra tiriṃti riri — one causes entry with the jewel held in hand,
or with one bearing a garland of flowers.
These are cast into the maṇḍala itself.

Oṃ pratīccha vajra hūṃ.

Then one confers the sacred pledge with:

Oṃ vajra samaya hūṃ.

Then with this, the face-covering is to be removed:

Oṃ vajra hāsyo tghaṭāya hūṃ.

Then with this, the maṇḍala is to be revealed:

Oṃ vajra dṛśya hoḥ.

Then one confers the empowerment with:

Oṃ vajrābhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ buddhābhiṣiñca oṃ.
Oṃ ratnābhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ padmābhiṣiñca hrīḥ.
Oṃ karmābhiṣiñca aḥ.

Then one confers the vase empowerment with:

Oṃ vajra kalaśābhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ buddha kalaśābhiṣiñca oṃ.
Oṃ ratna kalaśābhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ padma kalaśābhiṣiñca hrīḥ.
Oṃ karma kalaśābhiṣiñca aḥ.

Then one is to confer the garland empowerment:

Oṃ ratnamālābhiṣiñca trāṃ trāṃ trāṃ trāṃ trāṃ.
Oṃ vajra paṭṭāvalambhanābhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ vajra mudrābhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ buddha mudrābhiṣiñca oṃ.
Oṃ ratna mudrābhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ padma mudrābhiṣiñca hrīḥ.
Oṃ karma mudrābhiṣiñca aḥ.
Oṃ vajra nāmābhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ aḥ.
Oṃ vajra karmābhiṣiñca hūṃ aḥ.
Oṃ vajra cakrābhiṣiñca hūṃ bhruṃ.
Oṃ vajra cakrādhi pa dhi sthama bhiṣiñca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ.
Oṃ oṃ oṃ. Trāṃ trāṃ trāṃ. Hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ. Aḥ aḥ aḥ.
Oṃ vajra dhāraṇyabhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ tathāgata dhāraṇyabhiṣiñca oṃ.
Oṃ ratna dharaṇyabhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ padma dhāraṇyabhiṣiñca hrīḥ.
Oṃ karma dhāraṇyabhiṣiñca aḥ.
Oṃ sarva tathāgata guhyābhiṣiñca oṃ.
Oṃ vajra guhyābhiṣiñca hūṃ.
Oṃ ratna guhyābhiṣiñca trāṃ.
Oṃ padma guhyābhiṣiñca hrīḥ.
Oṃ karma guhyābhiṣiñca aḥ.
Oṃ prajñopāya samayogābhiṣiñca hūṃ aḥ.

Having thus conferred the empowerments, one bestows this awareness-mantra for the increase of longevity:

Oṃ bhruṃ vajra āyuṣe hūṃ aḥ.

The sādhana for this is as follows. Draw the Blessed One Vajra Amitāyus, radiant with the light of the moon, seated upon a lunar maṇḍala, adorned with all ornaments, his two hands in the gestures of fearlessness and supreme giving, from which nectar drips.

Below this, draw the sādhana practitioner with palms joined and outstretched, face upturned, gazing at the Blessed One. Make offerings of five kinds of offering, and in the presence of the deity recite one hundred thousand times.

Then, on the fifteenth day of the lunar month, make a great offering, pour red and yellow butter into a clay vessel, press it with the left vajra, concentrate the mind intently upon the Blessed One, and perform recitation throughout the night without break.

Thereupon a fragrant scent will arise, along with an unprecedented and extraordinary fragrance. Warmth, smoke, and fire will also arise. Rays of light will blaze forth. When such signs as these appear, one is to accomplish the practice together with that butter, or with fresh butter, or with sesame oil, or with water, or with milk, or with yoghurt, or with beer, or with blood, or with fat, or with brain, or with flesh, or with whatever substance is suitable. Having done the morning protection practice and the other preparatory rites, one purifies oneself, and then drinks or consumes it. If the signs appear just as described, one will become equal in lifespan to the moon and sun for as long as they endure, and one will also become equal in lifespan to Vajrasattva. At minimum, one will attain the lowest siddhis — of this there is no doubt.

Even if the signs do not appear, one will be free from illness in this world, endowed with a joyful mind, free from grey hair and wrinkles, with a stable body, and will be able to live for a hundred years.

Furthermore, merely by performing the recitation, the rites of pacification, enrichment, subjugation, and the rest will be accomplished without need of further deliberation — of this there is no doubt.

Then the four Great Kings paid homage to the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi and addressed him with these words:

"Blessed One, we too wish to speak our own heart-essences for the sake of the welfare, benefit, and happiness of all sentient beings. We request the Blessed One to grant permission. We request Vajrapāṇi to grant permission."

"Excellent! Excellent, Great Kings — speak! I rejoice, and I shall bless your respective pledges."

Then the Great King of the yakṣas, Vaiśravaṇa (the son of Wealth-Rester), having received the Blessed One's permission and rejoicing in it and receiving the blessing, drew forth his own heart-essence, his own heart-dwelling mantra:

Oṃ vai.

Then the Great King of the gandharvas (scent-eaters), Dhṛtarāṣṭra (Guardian of the Land), likewise spoke his own heart-essence:

Oṃ ḍhri.

Then the Great King of the kumbhāṇḍas, Virūḍhaka (the Noble-Born), likewise spoke his own heart-essence:

Oṃ bhi.

Then the Great King of the nāgas, Virūpākṣa (Ill-Favored Eyes), likewise spoke his own heart-essence:

Oṃ kṣa.

Then they described the maṇḍala in verses:

Four-sided, with four gates,
adorned with five maṇḍalas —
in the center, draw the Protector,
Vajrapāṇi, with his retinue.

To his left,
the auspicious Vaiśravaṇa, the Wealth-Rester,
holding a spear and a mongoose,
adorned with precious ornaments,
seated on a lion throne, large and imposing —
draw him with the radiance of golden hue,
with a skilled artist depicting an excellent vase and the like,
and a rain of precious treasures falling.

In front, Dhṛtarāṣṭra himself,
striving with perfect dedication to play the lute,
beautiful in form, green in color,
adorned with all ornaments — draw him so.

To the right, the hero Virūḍhaka,
of noble stature —
draw him holding a sword in hand.

To the west, Virūpākṣa,
supreme, grasping a vajra-lasso,
surrounded on all sides by seven serpent-heads,
his eyes red and very prominent — draw him so.

At all the gate-directions,
the gate-guardians likewise.

Then the mantrin enters himself.
Invoking the Blessed One himself
through what is known as the mudrā of the wheel,
he then invites the kings.

Having invited them, the skilled one makes offering —
the offering of water for the feet and other rites in proper sequence.

Then the disciple — whether of royal lineage,
or of noble lineage, or brahmin lineage, and so forth —
adorned with a garland of flowers,
is to be introduced by the knower of mantras with this mantra
and the mudrā of Vajradhāriṇī:

Oṃ vajra samaye hūṃ.

Then one should cast this flower or jewel:

Oṃ vajra pratīccha dhāṃ mahottama.

Upon whichever king it falls —
by that one will success be gained, by none other.

Then, while remaining in the corner of the maṇḍala,
empowerment is conferred by the four vases,
and the fifth is that of Vajrapāṇi —
empowerment is to be given by the mudrā itself.

Proceeding in this sequence and so forth:
having drawn the maṇḍala and conferred empowerment,
one who is not a king will become a king;
one who is already a king will become a great king —
lord of Jambudvīpa, endowed with glory,
the supreme sovereign of all four continents.

When empowerment has been conferred four times
and one has entered four times,
then Vajrapāṇi, lord of victors,
shall protect that one as his own child.

We four Great Kings as well,
together with our subjects and retinues,
with the kings who hold lands and palaces —
we shall ever guard such a one.

His ill-disposed enemies,
his adversaries both foreign and domestic,
the terror of the Lord of Death, famine,
pestilence, and harm — we shall destroy.

Vaiśravaṇa will bring abundance;
Dhṛtarāṣṭra will bring peace.
Virūḍhaka will destroy the Lord of Death who brings untimely death
to livestock and to kin.
Virūpākṣa will bring well-being
and utterly vanquish famine and the rest.

In brief, I shall fulfill
his every hope and every wish —
but if one is of uncertain character,

— Vajrapāṇi has been deceived.

Then the ten Guardians of the Directions (lokapālas) bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, we too, for the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings, each offer up our own essence."

"Excellent, excellent, O World-Guardians! Speak those excellences aloud."

Then Indra, Lord of the elemental spirits, and the others each offered up their essences:

Oṃ Ī. Oṃ Iṃ. Oṃ A. Oṃ Ya. Oṃ Ṛ. Oṃ Vaṃ. Oṃ Yaṃ. Oṃ Ku. Oṃ Aṃ. Oṃ Bā.

Then the maṇḍala of these beings was described. Draw it as the earlier maṇḍala:

Place the Protector in the center, just so.
The Guardians of the Directions each within their own quarter.
What is to be placed appears in two forms before the eyes:
the form of the sun and the form of the pig.
The Door-Guardians are placed likewise.

Then invite all of them,
and make worship with every offering.
Then, after entering oneself,
introduce the disciples as well.
With the vase-empowerments, reciting the mantras
of the Guardians of the Directions and the rest, confer the empowerment.

Then, for the benefit of those who wish it,
give the essence for the accomplishment of their aims.
The quarters where the Guardians of the Directions reside
will be perfected without need of examination.

Then, well pleased, they spoke these words: "Blessed One, whosoever is anointed with the royal consecration, who enters this maṇḍala and receives the empowerment — and likewise any son of noble family or daughter of noble family possessed of faith — all such persons we shall, O Blessed One, guard completely, protect, and shelter. We shall defeat the armies of the enemy. At the proper seasons we shall send down rain. We shall cause grain, flowers, and fruits to grow."

Then Yama, the Dharma King (lord of death), bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, I shall extend the life of that great king. I shall individually ward off each of the eight untimely deaths."

Then Bidentāḷa, the great lord of the rākṣasas, spoke these words: "Blessed One, that great king, the sons of that great king, and any brahmin, noble, or other person whatsoever — I shall free them from illness, from fear of hungry ghosts and spirits, from fear of rākṣasas and the like, and from fear of untimely death. At all times I shall guard, protect, and shelter them."

Then Varuṇa, the great king of the nāgas, spoke these words: "Blessed One, at all times I shall guard that king and every land, protecting them completely on all sides. I shall also cause grain to grow. The afflictions of the nāgas shall not arise. Poison and lightning shall not strike. All flowers and fruits shall ripen in full abundance. All fears I shall individually avert."

Then the Lord of the Wind spoke these words: "Blessed One, I too shall ensure that for that great being, at all times, no fear from wind shall arise, no unseasonable winds shall blow, and all grain, flowers, and fruits shall be brought to full growth."

Then Kubera, the great king of the yakṣas, bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, I, together with eighty great yakṣa generals, shall come with full strength and at all times individually avert every fear for that great being. All wealth and grain shall arrive in abundance."

"I shall also protect his own people and people in general, his land, his dwelling, his servants, his relatives connected by kinship and by friendship, his sons, his daughters, and his wives and the rest. Oxen, cows, donkeys, mares, sheep, buffalo, elephants, horses, goats, and the rest I shall also protect."

Then Śakra (Indra), lord of all elemental spirits, bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, I shall fully protect, fully uphold, fully sustain, pacify, and bring good fortune to that king, his princes, the warrior caste, and the brahmin class, both in this world and the next. I shall fully dispel calamity, neutralize poisons, destroy poisons, bind the boundaries, bind the earth, bind the directions, and erect a vajra fence, plant vajra stakes, and raise a vajra canopy over them. I shall be present in attendance for every need. I shall give clear signs indicating what is to be done and what is not to be done. I shall communicate through dreams everything that is neither wholesome nor unwholesome. For all undertakings I shall remove every obstacle and grant all accomplishments."

Then the Lord of Those Who Move Through and Inhabit the Sky bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, at all times I shall come, together with my entire retinue, to the king, his princes, the royal ministers, and all brahmins and members of the warrior caste who travel the road, and I shall protect them, defend them, and accomplish complete concealment for them. I shall individually avert every abode of obstacles. I shall dispel all illness. At all times I shall follow closely behind them."

Then the Great Boar, lord of what lies beneath the earth, spoke these words to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, at all times I shall accomplish the aims of human lords, of the noble class, of brahmins, of the common people, and likewise of all sons and daughters of good family. I shall also protect them from every fear, and moreover I shall protect them fully."

Then the eight great planetary lords together with the constellation spirits spoke these words: "Blessed One, we, together with our retinues, wish to offer our respective essence mantras. We request the Blessed One to bestow his blessing upon them." The Blessed One declared: "Excellent! Excellent! I have bestowed my blessing. Now let the great planetary lords speak." Thereupon the great planetary lords, beginning with the Sun, bowed before the Blessed One and recited:

Oṃ ā. Oṃ so. Oṃ aṃ. Oṃ bu. Oṃ bṛ. Oṃ śu. Oṃ sa. Oṃ rā.

Then their maṇḍala was to be drawn. In the center, paint the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi in the form of the Victor over the Three Worlds. At the four borders, paint the four great oceans. Before him, paint the planet Rāhu. Behind, paint the Moon. To the right, paint the planet Mercury, and to the left, paint Bṛhaspati. In the station of fire, paint Aṅgāraka. In the direction of wind, paint the Sun. In the station of Śakra, paint Saturn. In the direction of the rākṣasas, paint Rāhu.

Around the outer perimeter of the maṇḍala paint all the constellations. At each gate, paint the gatekeepers with wrathful expressions. The holder of the vajra enters the rite, and with the vajra hook and other instruments all are invited in.

Oṃ vajra hana hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ vajra grahe samaye hūṃ. Oṃ vajra graha pratiṣṭha hūṃ.

Then the officiant, the mantra-holder, performs empowerment using the eight mantras of the eight planets along with the eight vases. Then empowerment is conferred with the vajra mudrā, and thereafter all the planetary rites are to be performed.

Then the great planets bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, we eight great planets will at all times and in every way act accordingly toward that great king and toward the prince. Then the constellations (nakṣatras), and the moments, instants, and brief intervals of time, and the deities of the maṇḍala of the lunar days, conjunctions, lunar mansions, seasonal junctures, and auspicious entry-points and the like likewise bowed and spoke these words: "Blessed One, we too shall at all times never break the command of that great being, but shall watch over him as a lord watches over his domain. We shall individually protect every city, every town, every region, every district, and every place within the royal palace. And when great dangers arise, if he makes offerings to us, those dangers shall without fail not occur."

Then the eight great nāgas pleased the Blessed One with the word "phuṭ" and spoke these words: "Blessed One, we present our secret essences." The Blessed One replied: "Excellent! Excellent, O great nāgas! Present your secret essences." Then, filled with delight, they bowed before the Blessed One and spoke:

Oṃ phuḥ. Oṃ phuḥ. Oṃ phaṃ. Oṃ phuḥ. Oṃ phī. Oṃ phai. Oṃ pho. Oṃ phau.

Then the maṇḍala of those nāgas was described:

Draw a great eight-petalled lotus,
beautifully rendered in white.
In the center of that maṇḍala
abides Vajrapāṇi, supremely dark,
with seven tiers of serpent-hood crests.
Draw him with a great threatening gaze, menacing.
Just so, place the boundless ones:
the source of power, the one endowed with lineage,
the wealth-expanding one, the son, the conch-bearing one,
the lord of the lotus and of the waters likewise.
In short, on each petal
paint those ones with blazing serpent heads.
Paint them with seven-headed serpents
embracing their consorts about the neck.
The eight vases are to be placed,
along with torma offerings, beautiful divine food-offerings,
butter, milk, and honey,
and also the various kinds of medicinal preparations.
The one who dwells as the lord of the vajra
draws in those who bear serpent heads with the serpent-hook.
Together with the word "phuṭ,"
one recites: Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ.

Then, having caused the king or one of royal lineage
to enter among all of them,
empowerment is conferred with the word "phuṭ"
in order to remove the fault of poison.
Thereafter, even by merely pronouncing the names,
all the purposes relating to those nāgas are accomplished.
Then all of them, filled with joy,
bow before the Blessed One,
and standing in his presence with palms joined,
they make great aspiration prayers:

"Blessed One, should those who rejoice in the Blessed One's teaching and have entered this maṇḍala be deceived, then at that time may they be as though they had deceived the Blessed One himself. May we be burned by lightning. May the all-blazing vajra shatter our heads. We shall at all times perpetually guard, protect, and shelter that great being. We shall generate great splendor, strength, and diligence. We shall render his poisons harmless. At the proper times we shall send down rain. We shall bring all flowers to full perfection. Upon all the armies of the enemy we shall send down rain at both the proper and the improper times. We shall cause all worldly growth to flourish. We shall fully accomplish the command of the Victor and the command of the vajra-holder."

Then the accomplishment rite was described:

Offering substances radiating white light,
dwelling in the place where the nāgas bow in reverence —

having focused upon the vajra-holder as principal,
recite the word "Phud" one hundred thousand times.

Then, for one who has been seized by poison,
visualize the maṇḍala of what is called "Phud":
divine substances with garlands of light-rays massed together.
Having visualized this, contemplate the Phud syllable upon it.
By the wind of the Phud, the skin, flesh,
bones, and poison of every kind residing there,
in the form of Phud — drawing out from the hands like a snake's-head snare —
shall all be extracted and the person healed.

Then, while accomplishing all activities,
such as epidemic poisons, compounded poisons, and the like —
if even a fist-strike can clear all of these,
what need is there even to speak of the snake's-head mudrā?

Then the great lord of the great serpents (nāgas), surrounded by eight great and terrifying Mātṛkās (mother-goddesses), bowed before the Blessed One and spoke these words: "Blessed One, through our terror and the terror caused by the Mātṛkās, gods, nāgas, and all the rest tremble and quake violently, fall face-down helpless, lose their garments, lose their minds, and wander about in confusion. In order to benefit them, we desire to offer our essence-mantras; may the Blessed One graciously bestow his blessing upon them."

"Excellent, excellent, O Great Terrifier! You who cause utter terror — speak the essence-mantras of yourself and all your divine daughters."

Then the Great Terrifier, uttering a terrifying sound, spoke these words:

Oṃ bhairava bhairava svāhā. Oṃ bha svāhā. Oṃ bhi svāhā. Oṃ bhu svāhā. Oṃ bhe svāhā. Oṃ bhai svāhā. Oṃ bho svāhā. Oṃ bhāṃ svāhā. Oṃ bhaḥ svāhā.

The Blessed One, the Great Terrifier,
instructed those eight in the oral instructions.

Then their maṇḍala was described:

Draw a great wheel with eight spokes.
In the center, place Vajrapāṇi,
the Great Wrathful One, Conqueror of the Three Worlds —
give him the name "Universally Victorious."
Beneath his feet, draw the malevolent one,
the great lord of terrifiers, together with the Mother of Terrifiers.
In all the inner segments between the spokes,
draw the other eight terrifiers as well, each with their Mātṛkās,
with wrathful faces and wrathful minds,
depicted however one pleases.
Here likewise at every gate
draw extremely wrathful gatekeepers.

Then, having summoned them with iron hooks and the like,
offer worship with skulls filled with blood.
Excellent meat, beer, and torma offerings,
vessels filled with blood,
skull-cups, severed heads,
and eight vases filled with blood or beer —
place all these within this maṇḍala.

Then the Conqueror of the Three Worlds, the Supreme One,
shall perform the initiation of the disciple.
The eight of them shall confer empowerment
by means of skulls and vases.

Then the activities shall be bestowed.
Either in the dwelling of the Mātṛkā or in a single night,
worship the Supreme Tamer of the Three Worlds properly,
and recite four hundred thousand times.

Then, having heard the terrifying sound,
the Great Being, made fearless,
shall offer arghya — the finest blood
filling a skull-cup.

Then the wrathful terrifying one,
the Mātṛkā with the malevolent mind,
will be seen surrounded by a retinue of terrifiers,
encircled by the eight.

Having rendered them fearless upon beholding this,
while recalling the syllable Hūṃ,
offer a skull-cup filled with the finest meat or beer.

Then the malevolent terrifier, subjugated and pleased,
having been fully propitiated,
will say "Speak whatever you desire!"
and with a delighted mind will bestow it.

Apart from granting the grounds themselves,
they bestow: flavors and elixirs, substances,
swords, wheels, and tridents,
the heavens, the surface of the earth, and the subterranean realms,
sovereignty over the continent and the four continents,
the lordship of Śakra (Indra) himself, mastery over yakṣas,
the state of a rākṣasa, the state of a vidyādhara (knowledge-holder),

the state of a wheel-turning knowledge-holder (vidyādhara-cakravartin), sovereignty over the three worlds, or one's own retinue of attendants, or the hosts of mother-spirits — all these will be bestowed. Whatever attainment one desires, it is to be received just as wished. Displaying the form of hūṃ, the deity grants the boon, laughs, and departs. If one is frightened, the deity slays instantly.

Then Brahmā and the other great gods prostrated to the Blessed One and spoke thus: "Blessed One, if you would grant us permission, we too would explain our own realizations."

Then the Blessed One, contemplating with loving care, was pleased to bestow his blessing. Thereupon Brahmā and the other gods each declared their own essential mantras.

Oṃ āṃ. Oṃ bi. Oṃ ru. Oṃ i. Oṃ kaṃ. Oṃ ga. Oṃ bṛī. Oṃ ka.

Then their maṇḍala was described. Draw it as the earlier maṇḍala. In the center, draw the Subduer of the Three Worlds. Before him, draw the hero Īśvara holding a trident. Behind, draw the form of Brahmā. To the left, draw the one who holds a wheel. To the right, draw Indra himself, holding the token of his own seal. These, by their nature as gate-guardians, are here. Place consorts within their own maṇḍala. Fill vase upon vase and set them in the outer maṇḍala. Goodly-power and the other great powers are then the gods to be entered. The skilled one invites them from all sides, and with jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ, let all the gods enter the sacred palace.

Then, having seen them arrive, worship them with great joy. Thereupon the Vajra-holder leads the disciples in the seal-gesture, with the mantra:

Oṃ pratīccha mahāsattva vajradhara jñāpaya hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ.

Cast flowers just as they are, then open the eyes and reveal. Then confer the empowerment with the water of the praised vases. Thereafter, bestow upon the gods whatever attainments they desire.

Having first performed one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand recitations as approach practice, the practitioner accomplishes Īśvara and the other supreme gods. At a single-marked site or at the abode of Vajrapāṇi, or at a palace of the Tathāgata, or at a stūpa possessing relics, the practitioner should always accomplish all the gods in accordance with the rite.

Then at midnight the gods come and one will certainly hear: "What do you desire? Whatever is pleasant and beneficial I shall give. Speak quickly — consider carefully — for I shall give you the highest." Then, knowing the mantras, make supplication to the attainments and to the supreme gods. Petition without limit for: divine substances, essences, essence-extractions, invisibility, ḍākinīs, pills, royal sovereignty and its requisites, and whatever the mind desires.

Then the Great Lord (Śiva) and the others prostrated to the Blessed One and spoke thus: "Blessed One, those who enter worldly and supramundane maṇḍalas — those devoted ones — may you, Blessed One, purify all our obscurations as gods. Show us the path to the higher realms. Show us the path to the happy destinies. Show us the path of the sacred Dharma. Show us the path free from obscuration. Show us the path of discernment. Show us the path of definite emergence. Show us the path of nirvāṇa. Show us the path of relinquishment. Show us the path free from affliction. Show us the path to the attainment of buddhahood. Show us the path to the attainment of bodhisattvahood."

Show us the path to the attainment of Vajradhāra. At all times protect, guard, and shelter us from every fear. Protect the cities, the towns, the regions, the districts, and the royal palaces with their surroundings. Protect also the countries, the directions, and the settlements. Grant us kingship. Grant great kingship to those who have obtained kingship. Grant the sovereignty of wheel-turning kings over one continent, two continents, three continents, four continents, the happy destinies, the surface of the earth, and the subterranean realms. In short, grant even the state of Śakra (Indra, king of the gods), the state of Brahmā, the state of Viṣṇu, and the state of the Great God (Śiva)."

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi looked once more upon his own maṇḍala and smiled. Thereupon those maṇḍalas of the retinue stirred, stirred greatly, stirred utterly; they shook, shook greatly, shook utterly; they blazed, blazed greatly, blazed utterly; they rejoiced, rejoiced greatly, rejoiced utterly; they played, played greatly, played utterly — and many wondrous and extraordinary things were truly and fully seen throughout the world.

Then Brahmā and the other gods, struck with great amazement, prostrated to the Blessed One and spoke thus: "Blessed One, what is the cause of this smile? Buddhas, blessed ones, and bodhisattvas do not smile without a cause. Blessed One, therefore, please tell us the cause of this smile by way of a prophecy."

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi, having heard the words of the gods' request, declared: "Brahmā and the rest of the gods, listen to this mantra of great splendor — the vidyā (Skt. vidyā, knowledge-spell) that subdues the lord of death, which all the buddhas of the past have taught, and the vidyā that destroys untimely death."

Then the gods headed by Brahmā, filled with delight and with their hair standing on end, prostrated to the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi and offered up the exclamation "Excellent!" They said: "Blessed One, excellent, excellent! Vajrapāṇi, excellent, excellent! Please now teach the vidyā of great splendor and great power that conquers all opposition — through which beings of short life will gain long life, those seized by the lord of untimely death will be freed from untimely death, beings born in the lower realms will be liberated from those lower realms, and beings terrified by the fears of saṃsāra will, through the means of happiness, turn their backs on saṃsāra and swiftly attain manifest, perfect, and unsurpassed complete awakening."

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi, having heard the words of the petition of Brahmā and the other gods, drew forth this vidyā — the essence-heart of all the Tathāgatas — from his own vajra body, speech, and mind:

Oṃ puṇye puṇye mahāpuṇye avari mihā yuḥ puṇye jñānasaṃbhāropacite svāhā.
This is the vidyā of the essence-heart.

Oṃ vajriṃ svāhā.
This is the vidyā of the proximate essence-heart.

Oṃ bhrūṃ svāhā.
This is the vidyā of the essence-heart of the proximate essence-heart.

Oṃ krāṃ svāhā.
This is the vidyā that properly rouses the essence-heart.

Trāṃ svāhā.
This is the sacred essence-heart.

Oṃ hrīḥ svāhā.
This is the secret essence-heart.

Then the maṇḍala pertaining to these was explained. A maṇḍala with four spokes was to be made, and at its center was to be placed the Tathāgata called King of Splendor with Immeasurable Accumulations of Life, Merit, and Wisdom — whose essence-heart mantra is Bhrūṃ. Before him is Vajrapāṇi — whose essence-heart mantra is Vajriṃ. To the left is the Wrathful One —

whose essence-heart mantra is Krāṃ. To the right is Ākāśagarbha — whose essence-heart mantra is Trāṃ. At the back is the noble Avalokiteśvara, the Granter of Fearlessness — whose essence-heart mantra is Hrīḥ.

One is to draw the Tathāgata's maṇḍala of light. Five vases are to be established there, consecrated with the mantra of the wheel-turning sovereign, and placed in position — this arrangement having been praised by All-Action. Incense and the rest are to be set out. All the door-guardians, being foremost among the worshippers, are also present. Then, in order to properly initiate the mantrin, the holy Sugata (the well-gone one, an epithet of the Buddha) together with his sons, surrounded by an assembly of retinue, is invited together with the vidyā. The vidyā is also to be drawn to the left side of the Sugata. Then one receives empowerment oneself, sits in the cross-legged posture, and recites one hundred thousand times. Thereafter one will come to see the Tathāgatas directly, and will individually attain the supreme wish — whether Vajrapāṇi, or the noble Avalokiteśvara, or whichever one desires. At the time of meditative equipoise, the mind will become capable of all actions.

Then the disciples are to be introduced. With the mudrā of Vajrapāṇi, one is to arouse this pride:

Oṃ vajra-dhara, ratna-dhara, padma-dhara, viśva-dhara, tathāgata-samayam-ātikram, tathāgata-samaya-dhārātmako'haṃ.

Then by this rite one is to throw flowers:

Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-pratīccha ho samaya stvaṃ.

Then the garland is bound to the head and empowerment is conferred:

Oṃ sarva-tathāgatābhiṣiñca dhārājñāpaya hūṃ bhūṃ.
Oṃ vajrābhiṣiñca hūṃ bhūṃ.
Oṃ ratnābhiṣiñca hūṃ trāṃ.
Oṃ padmābhiṣiñca hūṃ hrīḥ.
Oṃ karmābhiṣiñca hūṃ aḥ.

Then the empowerment of sacred pledge and command is conferred. The sacred pledge is as follows:

The Three Jewels and the awakening mind,
the holy guru — never abandon these.
Living beings are not to be killed,
nor is what has not been given to be taken.
One shall not speak falsehood.
One shall not make use of another's wife.
The guru is not to be reviled,
nor is even his shadow to be trodden upon.
One is not to receive from one who is not a master,
and even the signs relinquished by the master —
mantras, mudrās, and sacred marks —
are not to be scorned, least of all before the gods.
If in delusion one should scorn them,
one will surely die of disease.
The shadow of an ancient divinity of worship,
the mudrās, syllables, and marks
of what is worldly and what transcends the world —
these are not to be stepped upon.
Fools who harm the Three Jewels and the like,
who damage the Buddha's teaching,
and those who devote themselves to reviling the guru —
the wise shall exert themselves and slay such persons.
Those who lack the Dharma, those who commit arson,
those who perpetually strive to harm sentient beings,
and those who are hostile to the sacred pledges —
the compassionate mantrin shall subdue them with mantra.
Wealth that has been taken by force — receive it fully,
and give it to sentient beings who suffer.
With the intention of worshipping the guru,
of accomplishing the sacred pledges in the same way,
of fulfilling the aim of the maṇḍala and of the bodhisattvas,
and for the purpose of making offerings —
wealth that has been seized, or wealth taken by force, may be accepted.
Out of joy in benefiting sentient beings,
for the sake of the sacred pledge, of the guru's domain,
and of protecting the lives of sentient beings —
one may speak falsehood at all times.
To please the buddhas, to guard the sacred pledges,
and for the sake of accomplishing the mantric vidyā —
one may also make use of another's wife.
One who abides in the station of Vajrasattva
may perform and do all things;
since success will come and no fault will arise,
what need is there even to speak of one who possesses compassion?

Then by this rite the empowerment of command is conferred:

Oṃ sarva-tathāgatā jñāte dāsyāmi gṛhṇa vajra su-siddhaye. Oṃ vajra-tiṣṭha hūṃ.

By this rite a vajra is placed in the hand and the empowerment of enlightened activity is conferred:

Oṃ sarva-karmaṇi kuru buddhānāṃ hūṃ.

Then, in order to make the guru a true guru —

One should offer the best of one's own body,
together with goods, wealth, and grain,
horses and riding animals likewise,
the finest of servants and one's dwelling,
the sovereignty and dominion of a kingdom,
sons and daughters and one's wife,
one's mother, sister, and niece,
and beyond these, whatever else is desired —
all of this one should present to the guru with a mind of benefit.

Then one should make supplication according to one's wish for the siddhis — buddha-siddhi, the accomplishment of awakening, and beyond these, the great worldly powers as well.

Then, for the benefit of the child of the lineage, one who is without miserliness toward the mantric vidyā, who is possessed of a mind of faith and sincere devotion — to that person the siddhis are to be bestowed.

Having contemplated that all phenomena are without intrinsic nature, one should meditate with the mind. Then one should visualize the maṇḍala of the moon disk arisen from the syllable A. Having meditated upon one's own essence-syllable at the center, one should likewise meditate upon the samaya mudrā. Then the sādhaka (the ritual practitioner) should transform the entire visualization into a yoga taking the form of a deity. After that, one should consecrate one's own essence-syllable and the mudrā with the mudrā. Then the buddhas confer the empowerment in the proper sequence, from above and below.

Having thus aroused the divine pride, the adept should accomplish the practice. If even Tathāgatahood can be attained in this way, what need is there to mention the other siddhis?

Then Brahmā and the other great gods bowed before the Blessed One and spoke thus: "Blessed One, what will be the karmic maturation of those who — whether they be kings, princes, royal ministers, of the warrior caste, of the brahmin caste, of the merchant caste, of the common people, or even of lower station such as servants, persons of the border regions, or those born in the lineage of any station — have entered into this king of maṇḍalas?"

The Blessed One declared: "It is excellent, excellent, O assembly of gods, that you have asked this for the benefit of sentient beings yet to come. Hear, then, the karmic maturation that ripens from entering this king of maṇḍalas, receiving the empowerment, painting it, having it painted, rejoicing in it, paying homage to it, and making offering to it. O sons of the gods, in brief I have no enthusiasm for speaking of even a fraction of its benefits — for even if that mass of merit accruing to me were multiplied many hundreds of thousands of times, it could not be counted, reckoned, or compared. Not even by filling the space between all the Tathāgatas with masses of merit could it be adequately expressed. Blessed One, the karmic maturation that ripens for sentient beings who have entered the maṇḍala — this is wondrous! O Vajradhara, this is wondrous! Blessed One, we rejoice at having entered the maṇḍala of Vajradhara and so forth. Blessed One! Vajradhara! We rejoice!"

Then those gods bowed likewise and spoke thus: "Blessed One, among the sentient beings of Jambudvīpa there are those of little merit and short life, those endowed with the continuum of evil destinies, and those who have been born in the hells, among the hungry ghosts, or among the animals. How are we to accomplish their benefit, Blessed One?"

"O sons of the gods, let those beings enter into this very maṇḍala. Having caused them to enter, confer the empowerment upon them. Have them recite the Dharma syllables. Thereafter those sentient beings will come to have long life; those devoid of merit will come to be endowed with merit; and they will be thoroughly liberated from the evil destinies.

"O sons of the gods, confer the empowerment upon the names of those born in the evil destinies. Confer the empowerment also upon their images. Confer the empowerment upon the body of your own deity as well. Even upon those of the same family as such beings, upon their children, upon those of the same lineage, upon those who bear their names —"

Confer the empowerment also upon their servants. By placing them in the maṇḍala for seven days and conferring the empowerment seven times, they will assuredly be thoroughly liberated from the obscurations of the evil destinies.

O sons of the gods, reciting that name two hundred thousand times, three hundred thousand times, four hundred thousand times, or up to one hundred million times — even one who has committed the five acts of immediate retribution will be thoroughly liberated; what need is there to speak of those who have committed minor misdeeds?

O sons of the gods, make a circular pacification fire-pit — the smallest being one cubit, a medium one being a cubit and a half, or the finest being four cubits — and, using that name, burn one hundred thousand white mustard seeds; they will be liberated from all evil destinies. Likewise, by performing the very same rite upon the flesh, bones, hair, ashes, and so forth of such a being, they will be thoroughly liberated from all misdeeds.

In its center draw a wheel
with eight white spokes blazing with rays of light.
Around it draw the rim adorned with five-pointed vajras,
accompanied by white rays of light.
Then draw the vishvavajra,
and the supremely excellent vajra, jewel, and lotus.
Then, to destroy misdeeds,
perform the various mudrās.
On the outside draw the mudrās
of the outer vajra families.
Draw the symbols of the planets and stars,
and likewise those of the worldly maṇḍala deities —
the image of the principal along with its consort —
and place them together with the Vajra Holder.
Draw the vase, with vessels fully filled,
and torma and deity offering-cakes of purest white.
In short, after laying out the lines,
draw it all in accordance with the ritual.

Wearing white garments, with fearlessness like the embodiment of a buddha, keeping in mind those sentient beings abiding in the evil destinies, and in order to pacify their misdeeds and obscurations — perform the fire-offering of the pure tantra: mix together butter, milk, and honey with rice, barley, and mustard seed, along with the bones, flesh, and so forth of that being, or do it with the name alone. That being will then be reborn in a happy destiny.

For elaboration, as a learned one should perform it fully:
make a fire-pit of one and a half cubits, or four cubits,
or the finest being eight cubits,
fully encircled by a fence.
In its center draw a lotus with jewel radiance,
adorned with golden rays of light.
Around it draw jewels,
and on the fence draw lotuses.
On the outside draw the mudrās
according to the division of the five families.
Likewise draw the outer deities,
the hook, and so forth.

Wearing yellow garments, keeping in mind those abiding in the higher realms, and performing the elaborate rite for their benefit — the life, splendor, brilliance, and good fortune of that embodied being will increase.

Then, to bring about that being's benefit through subjugation, make a fire-pit in the shape of a bow — one cubit, one and a half cubits, or four cubits — and in its center draw a red lotus perfectly rendered. In its very center also draw a bow complete with its string. Around it draw bows complete with strings in red color. The mantra-holder should constantly perform the outer deity rites for that being, keeping it in mind. Wearing red garments, using red flowers and lotuses, red fruits with their calyxes, mixed with butter and saffron, and powder of red sandalwood — perform the fire-offering, and all gods and others will come under that being's power.

To utterly defeat the spirits and demons assailing that being, engage in the wrathful rite. Make a triangular fire-pit of two and a half cubits, or three cubits, or the finest being nine cubits. In the center draw a nine-pointed vajra, with a three-pointed one forming the border. Also make the vishvavajra, and mark the top and the three points of the pestle with a single-pointed vajra and a single-pointed demon-stake on the outside as well. Adorn it with the three vidyās as before. Set out vases, torma, and vessels, along with many food offerings. Fill a vessel with flesh and blood —

— skulls arrayed all around. Then, robed in black garments and wrathful, visualize yourself as the Conqueror of the Three Worlds. The evil karma and so forth of that embodied being — then, having crushed that evil and being free of all obstacles, act so as to bring ease. All the human beings of the higher realms and worlds, all those who move through the worlds of the three realms — by this very sequence of rites, swiftly do this for those who dwell in this life. Then, whatever has been done and for whosever sake it was done, it shall likewise come to pass for them. And the other acts as well — perform them just as before. By this, swift happiness and wellbeing shall be accomplished for all sentient beings.

Then the gods headed by Brahmā, filled with true joy, prostrated to the Blessed One and spoke thus: Blessed One, whatever noble son or noble daughter who, for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of sentient beings born in the lower realms, inquires into and enters into the practice of this Royal Tantra — we, the gods headed by Brahmā, shall cherish them as our own child. And as for all that has been taught, we need not even speak of doing it without omission. Whatever king, prince, or minister who learns the mantra as it has been taught — we shall cause their royal dominion to flourish. We shall protect their land, their direction, the dwelling places of their people, and the harvests of the people of their retinue. We shall cause wealth and grain to come in abundance. Women, men, boys, and girls shall we cause to be magnificent and flourishing. We shall cause prosperity, growth, good harvests, and happiness. Whoever, with faith in this Royal Tantra, affixes it to the tip of a victory banner and sends it forth into villages, towns, and the like — we ourselves shall gather them in. Place it atop a great elephant and have it carried around to all villages, towns, and the like: all untimely death and every harm shall be pacified. Before that great being we shall be understood to dwell in the manner of servants or children. Wherever this is practiced, there we shall know the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi himself to dwell in the saṃbhogakāya, in the body of Vajrasattva. We shall know the Blessed One Vajrasattva, Samantabhadra, the Fulfiller of All Hopes, himself to dwell in the form of this Royal Tantra. That very place we shall regard as a stūpa, honor it, prostrate to it, and guard it on all sides. And the vajra-master of great austerity who practices this Royal Tantra — we, the gods headed by Brahmā, shall attend upon him. We shall dwell before him in the manner of servants. We shall dwell as those who are sent and assigned. We shall heed every command. We shall perform every benefit and happiness. We shall bestow every siddhi. In short, Blessed One, we shall take the dust of his feet upon our heads. Blessed One, we shall prostrate to him. We shall follow along after him as his retinue. Blessed One, whoever enters the maṇḍala and receives the empowerment — we shall acknowledge them as our sovereign. We shall acknowledge them as Vajrapāṇi. We shall acknowledge them as Vajrasattva. We shall acknowledge them as Samantabhadra, the great bliss. We shall acknowledge them as a Tathāgata.

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi spoke thus to the gods headed by Brahmā: O gods headed by Brahmā, you who have performed one or two acts of service to the Dharma — such a true pledge as this is excellent! Now accomplish it well!

Then the Blessed One Vajrapāṇi, with mantras, vidyās, and —

— in order to stabilize all the heart-essences, he declared this, his own heart-essence:

Oṃ bhrūṃ druṃ vajrapāṇi dṛḍhitiṣṭha hūṃ. Oṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ vajra hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ dṛḍha vajra hūṃ. Oṃ vajra hūṃ sa. Oṃ vajra hūṃ āḥ.

Then the maṇḍalas for these were described. Draw the maṇḍala as the one before, and in the center draw a vajra, or else Vajrasattva, or Samantabhadra of great bliss. In front, draw Vajrapāṇi himself; to the right, the one who holds the precious jewel; to the west, draw the Lotus-holder; and to the north, draw the one who holds the variegated. Surround them with a circle on the outside and place all the buddhas there. Outside that, draw the bodhisattvas in due order. Outside that again, draw the supreme great bodhisattvas beginning with Maitreya. Accordingly, outside that, draw the monks — Ānanda and the rest, along with the Sage. Outside that, draw Brahmā and the rest, encircled by their own wives and children. Draw the planets, constellations, sun, and moon; the four great kings; the protectors of the directions and the guardians of the world — all these, accurately drawn in this maṇḍala. On the outside, draw depictions of the hell realms and the like, nāgas, and animals; and likewise at the gateways, draw the noble and mighty gatekeepers. On a white, pleasant, auspicious day, draw the maṇḍala with great care. The maṇḍala also extends to the dark quarter — there is no contradiction in this. The fifth day after the new moon, and especially the seventh and the full moon in Pisces, are especially praised for the ritual of the Lotus-holder's maṇḍala. For wrathful rites, draw it on the dark phase as well. For the maṇḍalas of the wrathful ones, the full moon in Pisces is especially praised. The kings praised the maṇḍala. Furthermore, one should apply diligence to the maṇḍala one has composed oneself, confer the empowerment at the rising from the east, and examine the aspect of the directions. Then, in placing the maṇḍala, one should examine it thoroughly in mind. First prepare the mantras and the tantra. Gently, with auspicious and peaceful mantra-forms, practice together with only one's own disciple who is in harmony with oneself. Then, in the morning of the next day, rise very early, wash well, wear clean white garments, and be pure. The wise guru together with the disciple should proceed all the way to the maṇḍala. Apply perfumed water very thoroughly around the whole area of the maṇḍala and make it clean and pleasing. Having purified it with fragrant water while reciting the great wrathful one's mantra, one should especially cause the heart-essences of the families to abide in the center. Perform all the mantra-rites of the chief of the maṇḍala. Having made the maṇḍala twelve finger-breadths in size with fragrant water on the ground, recite the vidyā of the maṇḍala seven times and then recite more. After that, make offerings to the gods according to one's ability — using the heart-essence called Great Awakening — with fragrant water, flowers, and so forth, and then present torma offerings, as well as consecrated incense. Then consecrate the water mixed with sandalwood and the like; and the flowers offered therein and the incense — also according to the ritual. The tooth-wood of the udumbara fig, the aśvattha, and the like — without blemish, neither too thin nor too thick, measuring about twelve finger-breadths — wash thoroughly with fragrant water, bind with a garland of flowers, anoint and fumigate with fine perfume and the rest. Upon touching it with the hand, recite the heart-essence many times, and seven times with the very mantra of the family, or as measured by the disciples. Taking up the tooth-wood and the rest correctly, place them one by one in due order, starting from the tip. Then the master, having established firm protection for the disciple, with the fire-offering pours ghee-anointed fuel-sticks, together with ghee, honey mixed with butter, and a libation-ladle of ghee into the fire and burns them —

— and the curd-porridge offering too is to be burnt. First, this is done to pacify the obstructors; then, to secure the compassionate acceptance of the deity; then, with the pacifying fire-offering, to calm misdeeds. After that, having examined the disciple, one performs the ritual residence in accordance with the rite. According to his capacity, he is to take up the vow accordingly.

These are the rites: the one wearing clean white garments, sitting while facing forward, is to begin the superior abiding. The master first bestows the Three Refuges. After that, the awakening mind — if it has not yet been aroused, it is to be aroused; if it has already been aroused, it is to be recalled once more.

Then, with water over which the wrathful mantra has been recited, purification is sprinkled upon the crown of the head. Touching the crown of the head, one recites seven times in meditative equipoise.

The heart-essence of the King of Vidyās, with the hand upon what has been anointed with fragrant perfume — by one skilled in averting fears, it is always to be recited seven times.

The wheel-turning king possesses a single syllable of the King of Vidyās. For Hayagrīva and the lotus family, there are ten syllables of the King of Vidyās. Śumbha — so called — of the vajra family: the great miraculous King of Vidyās, possessing four syllables of Hūṃ, is for the full accomplishment of all activities.

Common to all three families: the wrathful one, amṛta-entwined, for the complete defeat of all obstructors — this was taught by the Lord of Secrets. The mantra of all activities: after touching the crown with it and reciting it, purification is sprinkled with it as well, and fumigation is also performed with incense.

The empowerment — together with the vase, furnished with grain and all other requisites — is poured in small measure, praised with the King of Vidyās, and one performs the superior abiding in accordance with the rite. Offering-water of fragrant liquid is given, flowers too are offered, and fumigation is performed with incense.

The empowerment, together with the vase, is fully and correctly recited by the skilled master, and by that the empowerment is conferred.

Then, reciting again within the maṇḍala, the disciples who hold the samaya, with palms joined and facing the direction of manifestation, are then given the tooth-wood. The disciples in due order take it up, face east, and place the tooth-wood outside. After chewing it without breaking it, it is to be cast without turning aside. When the tooth-wood thrown forward falls with its tip pointing toward the disciple, at that time the highest siddhi is to be known. When it points facing upward, and likewise when the tip points east, it is widely held as the middling siddhi. If it points north, that is the direct vidyā siddhi — worldly. On the road of a hundred castings of the tooth-wood, if the tooth-wood faces downward, the lower siddhi will arise therefrom — of this there is no doubt.

Taking hold of the disciple in close contact as before, with the mantra of all activities, the master gives fragrant water. To each one, for the purpose of drinking, three sips are to be given.

Then the wise disciple rises and puts all this into practice. After that, having also made offering, lifting incense with the hand, the wise one, with reverence, makes supplication to the deities and remains in respect.

First, let the mantra be graciously heard; by the sequential practice of that maṇḍala, the deities are invited.

O Blessed Great One — so called — I bow to you, King of Vidyās. For the sake of compassion toward the disciples, and for the sake of offering to you, I wish to draw your maṇḍala of compassionate self-nature. O Blessed One, it is fitting that you bestow your grace upon me who revere you. O compassionate Protector of the World — buddhas, bodhisattvas, arhats, and whatever other deities of mantra —

And all the gods, the world-protectors, spirits (bhūtas) possessed of great magical power, and those who rejoice in the teaching of the buddhas — I pray that all of these too look upon me with perfect regard.

The one called the Great One, and the maṇḍala of the Great One — I wish to bring these into manifestation myself. According to the proper service of one who is reverent, having taken up the disciples along with myself with loving care, it is fitting that you, together with your entire maṇḍala, graciously come near.

Having said those words, whatever verse one speaks — having bowed to the Blessed One and performed the proper service of praise — one should invite the deities to depart. Then the Dharma is to be taught to the disciples who are free from attachment and who possess individual discernment. The one of keen intellect should be directed to turn their head to the east and be made to sleep in virtuous sleep. Then, in the early morning, one should inquire of them what dreams were seen in the night. When, without doubt, those dreams — whether virtuous or non-virtuous — are heard in the daytime, the Buddha, the Vajra-holder, maintains the samaya of the seven families.

Then, O child, the samaya and the vows proclaimed by the Victors — these you should uphold with faith, and you should also uphold the word of the guru. You must not take life. You must not take what is not given. You must not engage in sexual misconduct. And for the sake of accomplishment, these must not be done. You must not drink wine, and flesh and similar foods — you are never to eat them whatsoever. You must cause no harm to any sentient being. You must not abandon the Three Jewels. At all times uphold the awakening mind, the essential mantra and mudrā, the guru and the deities in their true nature. Do not transgress the word of the guru. Whatever would become a misdeeds — from that you must turn away.

Do not tread upon the offering-substances that have been presented to that one, nor upon their shadow. The same applies equally to the form of the mudrā. Do not disparage the mantras or the deities, and do not perform the rites of spirits. Do not disparage the non-Buddhists (tīrthikas) either. In brief, do not for yourself give rise to doubt, suspicion, or wavering. Likewise toward the tantra, the deities, and all the rest — having pledged with firm faith — thus does the one called Sarvavid (Omniscient) bestow the empowerment in just that way, with the supreme vase and so forth, conferring the ten empowerments according to one's wish.

Then the vajra and bell are to be placed in the hands, and after that the wheel and the other seven precious possessions are to be held, and empowerment is conferred in order to attain the sovereignty of a wheel-turning king, the supreme master of power, and in order to overcome evil; and the disciple who wishes to accomplish the mantras is to be made to receive the permission-blessing.

Then, bowing the head in praise, one should offer to the guru whatever desirable objects one wishes. Treasure of jewels, grain, wealth, gold, mounts, a house, a seat, sons, daughters, men and women — all these should be offered; and whatever villages and cities are desired — with one's own mind perfectly engaged, one should offer fees without fail. For the swift attainment of accomplishment, one should offer even oneself to the guru. In summary, one should offer oneself entirely. All the happiness of this life without exception, the supreme happiness of the world beyond, even buddhahood itself one will attain — what need is there to speak of the happiness of the gods? The guru is equal to all the buddhas. Whoever disparages the vajra-master will continually experience suffering. Therefore one must not disparage the master. One must not disparage one's vajra brothers and sisters either, and one must bear no resentment toward them.

Those who harm the Three Jewels and those wretched ones who disparage the guru and who have transgressed samaya — toward them one must show no forbearance. Likewise toward harmful ones of that kind — acting in exactly that way — one will obtain the accomplishment proclaimed by the Omniscient One. With loving care for all sentient beings, swift accomplishment will be obtained.

Then, for the benefit and happiness of the world with its Śakra (Indra, lord of the gods) and its divine assembly, the Blessed One proclaimed the ritual of accomplishment.

On the support for the drawing, one should depict the Blessed One, the Knower of All, exactly as he is, with to his right the Tathāgata King Who Thoroughly Purifies All Lower Realms, and to his left Śākyamuni; and below the King Who Thoroughly Purifies All Lower Realms, the noble Avalokiteśvara, sovereign lord, his complexion like the moon, holding a lotus in his hand; and below Śākyamuni, Vajrapāṇi. In the center among these, the Medicine King (Bhaiṣajyarāja), holding in one hand the fruit of the āmalaka plant — all others are to be drawn as the supreme offerers. Hayagrīva and those who strive to subdue the malevolent, the conquerors of the three worlds, are to be drawn turned toward their own personal deity, and in their midst Lochanā, Māmakī, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, and Tārā, each holding her own characteristic emblem.

Below these, one should draw a pond filled with crocodiles, fish, tortoises, white frogs, and the like, brimming with many water-born flowers. And one should draw incense, lamps, fragrance, garlands, food offerings, flowers, and various kinds of fruit.

At the very bottom, the practitioner is to be drawn with palms joined, seated upright and bowing in reverence.

Once this is complete, one should visualize the consecration, perform the opening of the eyes, and then make worship with offerings.

Then: if an auspicious sign is seen, accomplishment will come swiftly; if no sign is seen, accomplishment will come after a long time.

Laughter, and the sound of drums,
the sound of bells, and thunder itself,
seeing a monk, a brahmin, a woman,
or fruit — by these signs, accomplishment,
supreme, middling, or lowest, swiftly comes.

Then, by the image's mudrā and mantras, consecrate it. One should obtain what is to be obtained in accordance with how it was generated. Having performed self-protection and so forth with the Victorious One of the Three Worlds, having also meditated on one's own suchness, until the signs of accomplishment appear, one should recite three hundred thousand or six hundred thousand times.

Then, in a secluded place, any deficiency or excess in the recitation is to be made good — one should recite eight hundred times. After that recitation is complete, visualizing the maṇḍala as before and making vast offerings, one should recite through a single night.

Then if the chief lord, or his sons, or the deities are seen, at that moment one should request the supreme accomplishment according to the capacity of one's vessel. The deities, ever joyful, will bestow that fruitful accomplishment. Having prostrated, one should then receive accomplishment — supreme and the rest.

Offering to the guru and the Three Jewels each their respective portion, thereafter one should always practice oneself. If those are absent, the wise one should take them up and practice on their own. Striving for the benefit of all sentient beings, one will abide for many eons. If well accomplished, it accomplishes everything. Yakṣas, astral spirits, planetary faces, and the like become like servants with a mere word, and all activities — pacification and the rest — will be accomplished.

Then Śakra, lord of the gods, addressed the Blessed One with these words: "Blessed One, in order to utterly remove from the sufferings of hell and the other lower states those sentient beings who have committed evil deeds and fallen under the power of hell and the rest — how should this be accomplished?"

The Blessed One declared: "Lord of the gods, listen just as it is: those sentient beings who have committed great evil and fallen under the power of hell and the rest will be effortlessly freed from the sufferings of hell and the other lower states.

Likewise, having drawn the maṇḍala,
with vessels that have been recited over one hundred and eight times,
one should examine the conferral of empowerment as before.
Then their previously accumulated evil will be purified,
and from the sufferings of hell and the rest
all will swiftly be fully liberated.
The great being freed from evil:
having been born thereafter as a deity in a pure realm,
they will always hear the Dharma discoursed by buddhas."

They dwell upon the stage of non-regression
and progressively make awakening directly manifest.
Their image and their name,
written in saffron,
so that sentient beings may be freed
from the great terror of the three lower states —
the mantra-practitioner, devoted to benefiting others,
confers empowerment out of affection.

Then the yogin,
having conferred empowerment through mantra and mudrā,
and having contemplated the form of the deity,
should place it at the center of a stūpa.
The heart-essence of the deity, for oneself and others,
written toward the region of the heart,
with the mind aroused equal to the deity,
should also be placed in a home.

Their name and the mantra derived from it,
written with fine saffron,
should be completed to the full count of one hundred thousand,
and then performed supremely from the stūpa.
To exhaust even the greatest sins,
one should also complete the full count of ten million.
If it is done thus, that person will certainly
be freed from hell.

Likewise, they will be freed from hungry ghosts and animals,
and be born among the classes of the gods.
Reciting one thousand mantras, as stated,
multiplying from their name —
if even one hundred thousand in number,
or up to ten million, are completed —
they will be born among the classes of the gods.

If the skilled one performs a fire offering
using hundreds of thousands,
or even thousands of hundreds of thousands,
derived from that person's name,
they will be freed from the great sins of hell,
and for as long as the blazing sign abides,
they will be born in a truly pure realm.

White mustard, sesame, and rice,
together with goat's milk in proper measure —
these having been poured and the oblation wood prepared,
the fire offering should be performed according to the rite for as long as that endures.
Then that person will certainly
see signs near at hand of having been born
among the classes of the gods.

If there is a birth of the highest divine excellence,
or if, within the fire pit,
there blazes a white flame turning clockwise,
rising upward, stainless,
and blazing with gathered radiance,
and a steady, stainless light like lightning —
these are the fire signs one will see.
Or the fire deity himself
will appear in exactly that same manner:
stainless as the moon,
blazing white.

Upon seeing these signs,
know that one has been freed from hell and the rest,
that evil has been overcome,
and that one has been born in a happy destiny.

According to the rite, dig the fire pit
to a measure of four cubits.
Let a wheel be drawn at the center,
encircled at the edge by vajras.
The mudrās of the five families
should be drawn, each in its proper direction.
Likewise, the bodhisattvas and worldly protectors
and so forth should be drawn on the outside.

Then full vessels and ritual cakes filling their containers
should be placed in groups of eight or sixteen.
Edibles and provisions, offering foods,
flower garlands and the like,
pennants, victory banners, silks and so forth,
should be beautifully adorned with the finest parasols.

Thus the fire-offering hearth
should be properly and supremely employed for the fire offering.
The one who knows the rite, having drawn it as described,
invites the assembly of deities.
The one who knows the mantras, using mantra and mudrā,
presents the water-offering and the rest.
Having made a brief offering,
with the yoga of the deity one performs the consecration.

With camphor, saffron, and the like,
having anointed with butter and milk and sesame oil,
and having well filled with sesame, white mustard, and rice,
and with scented water —
with rice, incense, and resin,
and honey, flesh, and sugar —
these are recited over many hundreds of times.
And likewise with the oblation wood:
wood over which one has oneself applied the mantra
should be placed inside the pit.

The corpse of one who has dwelt among gods, nāgas, yakṣas,
and gandharvas (fragrance-eaters) and the like,
having been empowered with mantra,
should be washed with the finest water
and then anointed with mantra-recited perfume.

It should be adorned with robes and ornaments, and fumigated with incense that has been empowered with mantra. Offerings of flower garlands and the like are made. Similarly, at the crown tuft of hair and at the shoulders, syllables written with mantra should be affixed.

At the heart, the throat, and the face, it is consecrated by the Sarvavidyā. At the forehead, the ūrṇā hair-mark, and both ears; at the crown of the head, the very top of the skull, and both shoulders; at the ears, the flanks, and the knees; at the tip of the nose and the nostrils; at both eyes and at the location of the secret organ — and likewise at the other places — these supremely virtuous syllables are placed. In order to thoroughly purify the lower destinies, they are placed in the middle of the palm, together with a seat.

Then the mantrin wraps the body in robes that have been praised and empowered through mantra. Then the fire-oblation is fully kindled, and the body, blazing and licked by a thousand tongues of flame, becomes serene in mind like the moon or a jasmine flower. One should fully contemplate offerings to the immeasurable ones, and make worship exactly as it has been taught.

Then the fire-oblation, beginning from the first one, is brought to completion. While it is still burning, one should fully examine the count: starting from eight of the Victor and what follows, one should fully examine one hundred and eight. Then, according to the king of purification mantras, the twenty-one items to be burned are fully examined.

Then a white image of the face is invited, and the three — implements, offerings, and the like — are worshipped. Vajrapāṇi holding the lotus-lasso, adorned with all ornaments, bearing the crown of a perfect buddha, should be visualized and accurately drawn. The heart-essence of that deity is recited one hundred thousand times, or up to ten million times in fire-oblation. If a truly auspicious sign appears, it should be understood that the stream of misdeeds has thereby been abandoned.

Then, as the ashes come forth, according to the ritual the ashes and bones are gathered using the vajra-gathering method. With vajra-nectar perfumed water and the five products of the cow, reciting the purification mantra one hundred thousand times, and making a ball, blending it well with the scent of camphor and earth, one visualizes it as a statue or a stūpa of the deity. Once, twice, three times, four times, five times, or a hundred and eight times, it is consecrated with mantra and mudrā, and two hundred thousand recitations are performed.

Then either the stūpa blazes, or the statue smiles, or a fragrance of incense and scent arises, or a radiance of light, or various divine phenomena and miracles, or flowers and the like are scattered, or the sounds of conch shells, drums, flutes, lutes, and the like are heard.

If, due to the great weight of misdeeds, that divine sign is not seen, then one hundred and fifty million recitations are performed until the sign appears, while the Tathāgata is worshipped and the recitation is done in meditative equipoise.

At the end, one who knows the ritual recites without sleeping for even a single watch of the night. Then the person's misdeeds are clearly seen as utterly purified, and they come to know, through the divine body, their own form and the continuum of that person.

Having understood these signs, with a non-conceptual mind endowed with loving-kindness and compassion, all the activities are performed fully.

If even that is not present, then at that time it is done through recitation and meditation. Simply writing that person's name, making a garland of stūpas, and having also made a statue, if fire-oblation and empowerment are performed, that person will without fail be born in a higher realm.

The ashes, white mustard, sand, and the like, over which the name-spreading mantra has been clearly applied, are cast into a river flowing into the ocean. If this is done, even a person laden with misdeeds will be fully liberated from the lower destinies, and, endowed with the seed of supreme virtue, will reach buddhahood itself as the fruit.

Endowed with merit through thorough cultivation, with generosity, moral discipline, patience, diligence, meditative concentration, and wisdom as causes, one who overcomes the lower destinies of the world — what need is there to speak of such a one becoming even a god?

In this there is no doubt. For those who have not cultivated the root of virtue, those who hold the view of nihilism, those who have strayed from the path of awakening and cause harm to the teaching through aversion, those who do not know the nature of wrongdoing and feel no affection for their father and mother, those who do not rely on the awakening mind, those who have killed one who is free from attachment, and those who hold the view of non-existence toward gods, buddhas, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, mantras, mudrās, and the like — sinners such as these, without such wisdom and skillful means, have no liberation. So have the Sugatas, the Victors, declared.

Thereupon, Śakra (Indra, king of the gods) and the others, those with eyes like opened lotuses, were pleased with a word of "Excellent!" Having been thus pleased, they performed offerings. Śakra, striving for the benefit of others, acted precisely as had been declared, and in the same way attained the fruit.

The powerful one with the blue throat, mounted on the supreme bull among herds — white of body, four-armed: his first and second right hands hold a three-pointed vajra and make the gesture of supreme giving; his first left hand holds a trident and his second holds a sword, borne as an offering to the serpent — this one is to be depicted thus. His mantra is: Oṃ Paśupati Nīlakaṇṭha Umāpriya Svāhā. His mudrā is as follows: make a vajra fist with the hand, pressing the little finger down with the thumb, and form the remaining fingers in the likeness of a vajra, while the ring finger and index finger are bent slightly in the vajra manner. This is the mudrā of the Lord of Beasts.

Viṣṇu, mounted on Garuḍa, dark of complexion, four-armed: his right hands hold a staff and a vajra, and his left hands hold a conch and a wheel. The golden vajra resembling Viṣṇu is to be understood as golden in color.

Vajraghaṇṭā, mounted on a peacock, six-faced, red: his right hands hold a śakti and a vajra, and his left hands hold a rooster and a bell. Vajrakumārī is to be understood as resembling Vajraghaṇṭā.

The Silent Vajra, mounted on a lotus, golden of complexion, four-faced, four-armed: his right hands hold a vajra and a rosary, and his left hands hold a club and a ladle. Vajraśānti is to be understood as resembling Brahmā.

Vajrāyudha, mounted on a white elephant, his left hand holding his own vajra and his right hand holding a vajra that transcends the world. Vajra-fist is to be understood as resembling Vajrāyudha.

Vajramaṇḍala the Wrathful, mounted on a wooden chariot, red of complexion, his right and left hands holding a lotus and a solar maṇḍala.

Vajrāmṛtā resembles Vajramaṇḍala the Wrathful.

Vajraraśmi the Wrathful, white, mounted on a swan, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a lotus and a moon. Vajraraśmī resembles Vajraraśmi the Wrathful.

Vajradaṇḍa the Wrathful, mounted on a tortoise, blue of complexion, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a staff. Daṇḍaśrī resembles Vajradaṇḍa the Wrathful.

Vajraraktapīta the Wrathful, mounted on an elephant, red of complexion, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a captive person and devouring him. Vajramekhala resembles Vajraraktapīta the Wrathful.

Vajragaṇapati, elephant-snouted, mounted on an elephant, his right hand holding a vajra, his left hand holding a plowshare, white of complexion. Vajradamanī resembles Vajragaṇapati.

The distinction here, when asked what it is: the left hand holds a khaṭvāṅga. Vajramālā, Lord of the Host, is green of complexion, mounted on a kulika bird vehicle, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a garland of flowers. Vajradhāraṇī resembles Vajramālā. The distinction here, when asked what it is: the left hand holds a śakti.

Vajravān, mounted on a nīca vehicle, is white-yellow of complexion, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand bearing the standard of a sea-monster (makara). Vajravatī resembles Vajravān, and the distinction is this: her complexion is red.

Vijayavajra, Lord of the Host, is mounted on a tortoise, white of complexion, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a sword. Vajradhvaja resembles Vijayavajra.

Vajrakīlaka the Messenger Goddess, mounted on the chariot-cradle of a flower vehicle, is white-yellow of complexion, her right hand holding a vajra and her left hand holding a peg. Vajrakīlaka the Messenger Goddess resembles Vajrakīlaka, and the distinction is this: the left hand holds a khaṭvāṅga.

Vajravāyu the Messenger, blue of complexion, mounted on a deer, his right hand holding a vajra and his left hand holding a banner. Vajrajavā resembles Vajravāyu the Messenger.

Vajrāgni the Messenger Goddess, born of flame, mounted on a conflagration, red of complexion, blazing with three flaming points of light shooting upward, her right hands holding a vajra and armor, and her left hands holding a staff and a ladle. Vajrājvalā resembles Vajrāgni.

Vajrabhairava the Messenger Goddess, blue of complexion, mounted on a zombie (vetāla), her right hand holding a vajra and her left hand holding a trident. Vajraghora the Messenger Goddess resembles Vajrabhairava, and the distinction is this: the left hand holds a noose.

Vajrāṅkuśa the Servant, mounted on a Nāgottara, blue of complexion with a pig's face, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a hook. Vajrakṛṣṇā the Servant Goddess, mounted on a zombie, the left hand holding a khaṭvāṅga and the right hand holding a vajra, is black of complexion.

Vajrākarṣaṇī the Lesser Servant, mounted on a rat, is white of complexion, elephant-faced, the right hands holding a vajra and a battle-axe, the left hands holding a trident and a staff, and carrying a snake as an offering object.

Vajrasrūlmā the Servant Goddess, blue of complexion, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a broom, mounted on a rat.

Nāgavajra, mounted on a vajra-makara with an eight-stranded ornament, white of complexion, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a nāga-noose. Vajramakara the Servant Goddess, mounted on a makara, white of complexion, bearing an eight-stranded ornament, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a makara marked with a vajra.

Bhīmāsyā, green of complexion, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a sword and a pheṭaka.

Śrīmatī, white-yellow of complexion, the right hand holding a vajra and the left hand holding a lotus.

Vāgīśvarī, white of complexion, the left hand holding a lute and the right hand holding a vajra.

Boddhā, green of complexion, mounted on a lion, the right hands holding a vajra and a wheel, and the left hands holding a key and a sword.

With regard to all the Mātṛkā (mātr̥) goddesses, and the wrathful ones and those at the end of the water-lord group, and wherever a vajra is spoken of in the right hand, that is to be understood as a three-pointed vajra. All the gods, both worldly and supramundane, gaze directly toward Vairocana.

Then, at the juncture between sessions, having bound the vajra-tirinṭiri completely and taking a garland of blue flowers in hand, one enters the maṇḍala.

One recites the syllable Hūṃ four times and circumambulates Vairocana seven times, sounding the conch and bell throughout. Then, having gazed intently with a view to pacifying whatever faults of excess or deficiency may remain in any part of the maṇḍala, one offers the garland to the Blessed One, performs the vajra-dance, receives it back, and binds it upon one's own crown with the same four Hūṃ syllables.

Just as the rite prescribes —
One who would fully restore what is deficient,
And the skilled one would abandon all excess —
Let him examine vajra and bell with care.
The faults that lead to success, let him not abandon.

Thus it is spoken.

Then, the vajra-master, having become seated and entering meditative equipoise, mentally opens the four vajra-gates:
Oṃ vajrotghaṭaya samaya praveśa hūṃ.

The mudrā for this is as follows:
Cross the two vajra-fists one over the other,
Clasp them with the index fingers spread flat and open,
Then draw them apart firmly and with strength —
This is the rite of opening the gate.

Thereafter, having performed the various acts beginning with the iron hook, one places a vase — made of the seven precious substances or of clay, free from any blackness, long-necked, with a flowing spout, of ample girth, filled completely with divine fragrant water, all jewels, all medicines, and all grains, adorned with leafy branches, its neck bound well with fine cloth and protected, its exterior anointed with a trail of divine fragrance, a garland of flowers affixed to it, and marked at its top with a vajra, consecrated through the blessing of the great vajra, and held with the wrathful tirinṭiri together with a branch of flowers — and with this one proclaims the mantra Oṃ vajrodaka hūṃ, performing one thousand and eight recitations of praise, and one hundred and eight recitations of praise of the four Hūṃ syllables. One then places it well before the Blessed One Vajrahūṃkāra.

Outside the entrance gate facing inward, one sets a second vase over which the four Hūṃ syllables have been recited one hundred and eight times. With the water of that vase one confers empowerment upon oneself and upon the disciples, binding the mudrā of entry or leaving it unbound.

Coral, and likewise pale-green and white shell,
And jewels — all of these, together with singhri,
And vyāghra-giri and bebere,
Of medicines all: sesame, then black lentil,
Rice, and barley — these are the fifth.
These five medicines and all the grains are indicated by this verse.

Following this, one has the disciples take the vows of the four prostrations and so forth as a preliminary. One fully recites the mantra over the blue garment of Vajra-Yakṣa (yakṣa), binds the crown with the uṣṇīṣa of the bodhisattva, binds the face with the gate-guardian, and dons the vajra-armor as an upper garment, complete with uṣṇīṣa and the rest. The master then takes up the wrathful tirinṭiri and a garland of blue flowers, recites Oṃ vajrasamaya praveśāmi, and enters. One then makes supplication to all the Tathāgatas, beginning with the words "O Blessed One" and so forth.

Next, one drinks the vajra-water and proceeds to enter oneself. One casts that garland into the great maṇḍala, binds it upon each one's own crown, releases the binding of their faces, and they gaze upon the maṇḍala directly as it truly is. Then, with the words Tiṣṭha vajra and what follows, one also releases the mudrā of entry, and confers the water empowerment along with nine empowerments — the crowns of the five buddhas, the silk streamers, the vajra, the garland, the lord-empowerment, and the rest — received in the presence of the Blessed One by paying homage to the Blessed One and receiving them. One likewise takes up suchness, the Dharma, samaya, accomplishment, and the vajra conduct. One also makes excellent offerings to oneself with flowers and the like. Then, through the fifth verse, one grants permission; through the syllable Hūṃ one bestows praise and also gives prophetic declarations; and once again performs the blessings and the rest, along with whatever recitation is desired.

The syllable Hūṃ is Vajra Hūṃ. One recites one's own name, binds the great mudrā of Vairocana, and through that deity's mantra — which bears the form of Aḥ at its fringe — one descends the Tathāgata of the nature of vajra into the place of Vairocana. Through the words "Vajro Hūṃ," one cultivates the vajra pride and meditates upon that as Vajra Vairocana. This is Vajradhātu Aḥ Hūṃ. Thus, having bound the great mudrā up to and including the descent of the vajra, and having intoned the mantra of that deity — which bears the form of Aḥ at its fringe — at the northern gate, one descends the vajra of the nature of vajra and bell.

Through the pride of Vajra Ghaṇṭo Hūṃ, one meditates upon that as Vajra Āveśa Krodho Hūṃ. In this way the vajra is accomplished. Then the vajra master binds the bodhisattva Vajra with the iron hook, ensures that the bell-strap is properly attached, and gathers all buddhas together. The mantra "Oṃ Vajrasamāya Jaḥ — Jaḥ Hūṃ Baṃ Hoḥ" is recited in full twenty-one times. Then, straightway, one recites the great mudrā and the samaya of the Vajra Wrathful Ones. Immediately thereafter comes the supreme one of the hundred and eight names. Then, through the vajra hook and the rest, one invites from one's own direction, ushers in, binds, and brings under mastery. Accordingly, through the fourth syllable Hūṃ, one presents the water of offerings, accomplishes the samaya mudrās of glorious Vairocana and the rest along with their consummations at the end of the auspicious aeon, recites one's own mantra as it is to be recited, and through Jaḥ Hūṃ Baṃ Hoḥ — Samaya Stvaṃ Aḥ Hūṃ — one then recites one's own mantra. By means of this, accomplishment arises.

Then one withdraws the samaya mudrās:

From the vajra arose the holy secret —
the supreme samayas are proclaimed as these very things.
The supreme binding of the wrathful ones:
these shall be declared as the perfect bonds.

Interlace the vajra throughout the palms,
with the little fingers binding as iron hooks,
the index fingers fully extended —
this is called "Victor of the Three Worlds."

Likewise, with the index fingers touching,
the jewel itself drawn in at the middle,
joined at the palm, with the central lotus,
the ring fingers and the two index fingers:

the two index fingers are themselves the vajra;
the right one bent becomes the iron hook.
Joining these, with the syllable Hūṃ —
likewise in excellent form:

the two index fingers turned to the side in a frown,
the two index fingers round at the heart like the sun,
the hands fully extended over the crown of the head,
with the index fingers placed facing the mouth,

and the fingernails all turned inward —
the right hand in the treasury fist,
with the tip of the ring finger: the wheel itself.
The excellent supreme that issues from the mouth:

the middle finger as the vajra,
the index finger encircling the throat,
the remaining fingers at the canine teeth,
the vajra fist with the thumb pressed in.

The seductive mudrā and the rest are to be performed as explained in the Vajradhātu, as follows:

With the vajra fist bound and sealed,
either at the heart or with the thumbs equal;
fully extending it well, as the garland mudrā —
draw the palms joined from the mouth,

then from the dance, press the palms joined to the crown of the head;
give the vajra fist downward;
cast the well-joined palms upward;
with the thumbs leveled, bind decisively.

The fully extending — the anointing mudrā:
one finger bent,
and both thumbs tied in a knot;
the thumbs and index fingers crossed and bound;
the vajra fist of the supreme, tightly sealed.

In the maṇḍala of the heart essence, one visualizes the five-pronged vajra and, reciting in the form of Hūṃ, binds all the mudrās. Then comes the definitive arising of the mudrās: the mudrā of Vajra Hūṃkāra is placed also in the location of Vairocana, Vajra Hūṃkāra, Ratna Hūṃkāra, Dharma Hūṃkāra, and Karma Hūṃkāra. Then come the mantras of Ratna Hūṃkāra and the rest:

Oṃ Vajra Bhṛkuṭi Krodhānaya Sarvaratnāni Hrīḥ Hūṃ Phaṭ.

Oṃ Vajra Ṭvīḥ Ṭhīḥ Krodha Duṣṭa Māraya Hūṃ Phaṭ. Oṃ Vajra Viśva Krodha Kuru Sarva Viśvarūpāya Sādhaya Hūṃ Phaṭ.

The remaining mudrās are to be understood beginning from Vajrasattva's consort (Sattvaviajrī). For this very reason the highest vidyās (vidyā) declare them the mudrās of complete victory. When one gathers the mudrās together with that of Vajra Hūṃkāra, one should read them as the Blessed One Vajra Hūṃkāra. It is not fitting that the others become Vajra Hūṃkāra, nor is it stated in all the tantras that Hūṃkāra is definitively so designated. After that, accordingly, one places a vajra on the tongue, and in sequence one sets out the Dharma syllables of Buddha Vajradhara and the rest. These are as follows:

The syllable Hūṃ — the buddha endowed with vajra.
The syllable Trāṃ — the essence of the vajra.
The syllable Hrīḥ — of the vajra host of Rūpavajrī.
The syllable Āḥ — of the manifold vajra.
The syllable Hūṃ — of Sattva Vajrī.
The syllable Tvāṃ — of Ratna Vajrī.
The syllable Hrīḥ — of Dharma Vajrī.
The syllable Āḥ — of Karma Vajrī.
Hūṃ Hūṃ. Trāṃ Trāṃ. Hrīḥ Hrīḥ. Āḥ Āḥ.

For Vajrasattva and the rest, in great joy — Hūṃ. For beautiful form — Hūṃ. For all offerings — Hūṃ. For supreme joy — Hūṃ. For traversing the center — Hūṃ. For the supreme and excellent splendor — Hūṃ. For the supreme excellent fragrance — Hūṃ. Āyāhi Jaḥ Hūṃ. Āhi Hūṃ Hūṃ Hūṃ Hi Spoṭa Baṃ Hūṃ Ghaṇṭā A Āḥ Hūṃ. These belong to the sequence from Vajragīti and the rest up to and including Vajravepa.

Immediately thereafter, from the syllable Āḥ, the manifold vajra is generated in the heart, and the karma mudrā is bound. For this, the two wrathful fists are formed; holding the vajra finger of the left hand with the right and raising it upward — this mudrā called Supreme Awakening (paramabodhi) bestows the buddha's awakening in full measure. These two together, with their flourishing gesture, are made manifest: they belong to Vajra Hūṃkāra, Vajrasattva, and Sattva Vajrī.

Holding the hook correctly in place,
with the application of the arrow being sharpened,
"Excellent!" — residing in the heart,
the two vajras themselves conferring empowerment —

these belong to Ratna Hūṃkāra, Vajra Bhṛkuṭi, the Wrathful One, and Ratna Vajrī.

Gaze directly at the sun in the heart.
The staff held in the palm, placed to the left,
and likewise this one turning back completely,
right and non-right interlaced together —

these belong to Dharma Hūṃkāra, Vajradharma, and Dharma Vajrī.

A sword at the sun in the heart.
The wheel of a sickle-fire spinning.
The two vajras resting at the mouth,
with the vajra dance performed and unfolded —
dwelling precisely at the cheek and crown —

these belong to Karma Hūṃkāra, Vajrakarma, and Karma Vajrī.

The supreme armor of the little finger and fang.
The two fists bound without fail.
With the excellent application of the vajra flourish,
let the mind be stirred and bow down.
The rosary bound and drawn out from the mouth.
From the dance, palms joined at the crown.
Hanging below and scattering upward.
The thumbs brought together and firmly pressed.
From the application of the anointing gesture,
the mudrā of offering is widely proclaimed.
The index finger bound with a hook,
and from the little finger, the great hook.
The wrist knots, the supreme ones, intertwined,
and the back as well firmly pressed —

these are the mudrās of the door guardians. All karma mudrās arise from the dance.

Next, the binding of Vairocana and the rest is to be performed. For Sattva Vajrī, Ratna Vajrī, Dharma Vajrī, and Karma Vajrī as well — the first vajra, and those abiding at the end, those who take male form and those who take female form — whatever the great identity of each, and whatever the mudrā of each: these are to be bound. The mudrā of all of them is also the samaya mudrā (samayamudrā).

The left hand is made into a Tathāgata fist with the palm facing upward, and the index finger and thumb of the right hand, beginning from the little finger, are joined together in an open-palmed gesture with the palms pressed together. This is the samaya mudrā (samayamudrā) of Maitreya.

The vidyās of these — the mantras — are as explained before; those mantras are to be placed on the tongues of the deities. This is the Dharma mudrā of these deities.

From the syllable A, one generates a variegated vajra at one's own heart, follows it in the act of drawing, and binds the great mudrā — this becomes the karma mudrā. Visualizing a five-pointed vajra at one's own heart and following it in the act of drawing: from that very act, one binds the great mudrā of those deities. By that same means, one accomplishes what is common to the vidyās.

Binding the little finger and thumb together, and with the three middle fingers of the left hand forming three tips, the middle fingertip fully grasping the vajra mudrā — this supreme vidyā of the vajra is called the Splendor of the Vajra.

The rest is to be explained in full.

Those bearing the names Illusory Vajra and so forth —
with the vajra bound and firmly held,
the left vajra is also to be bound.
This is known as the Vajra Fist.
For all the vajra families, this applies.
With two vajras combined,
all the signs arrayed —
this is to be assigned to the mudrās
of all the vajra families.

Front and back fully extended,
the holding of the thumb is the rule.
The form of OṂ dwells at the crown,
firmly abiding through vajra force —
this is the assembly of the Vidyā King or the great mudrā.

Fully extending the front of the hands,
and likewise the front of the hands thus,
both hands remaining in a fist,
completely revolving from the mouth —
this is the assembly of the wrathful vajra mudrā.

The left thumb well placed,
firmly holding the rosary,
the right bestowing wealth,
and the sword mudrā shown in the fist —
this is the assembly of the mudrā of the great lord of the assembly.

The right hand holding a winnowing tray,
and the hand likewise fully extended,
the right displaying blazing all around,
the vajra fist trembling intensely —
this is the assembly of the mudrā of the great messenger.

With a smile, the tip of the mouth and fang,
anointing, thoroughly applying destruction,
the hand bent and joined,
and the right vajra snatching away —
this is the assembly of the mudrā of the servants.

Then come the mudrās of the assembly of mother goddesses beginning with Umā.

With the left, the vajra is bound;
the three-pointed sign is to be bound.
By this binding, the true
supreme vidyā of siddhi is oneself.
For all the vajra families,
the left is protected as supreme vajra.
According to the ritual, the samaya
mudrā is properly bound — this is to be fully explained.

All the supreme maṇḍalas are to be sealed.
Likewise the son mudrā,
and the OṂ mudrā in the same way —
the syllable with the ear is to be fully grasped.
The beautiful mudrā,
and the fully grasping of the blazing,
the sole gathering of rays as well,
the grasping of the staff in a fist,
the complete revolving from the mouth —
these with the wrathful samaya and its array,
the mudrā garland with vajra bound,
the nameless one abiding at the crown:
consume like a spoked maṇḍala.
The samayas of the radiant and spoked —
the hand drawn in, facing forward,
and completely encircling from behind,
the blazing rays released,
abiding in taming before one —
these are the samayas of the messengers.

Entering the two extremities, tips joined,
binding and causing to fall entirely,
the fingers interlaced and not interlaced,
and likewise the snatching of strength —
these are the samayas of the female servants.

Then, after placing the mantras on the tongues of the great gods and the rest, one likewise generates a vajra at one's own heart from the syllable A, binds their mudrā, and this becomes the karma mudrā.

One meditates on a five-pointed vajra at one's own heart, then follows after the great mudrā as it is drawn, and binds it.

Then one confers empowerment upon the Blessed One Vairocana, upon the Auspicious Aeon deities, and upon the outer Vajra Family, through the empowerment bestowed by the glorious Vajra Hūṃ — the consort empowerment of the precious vajra — together with the crowns of the five buddhas, garlands, and the empowerment of fluttering silks.

Then one offers the water of honor and performs the offering.

Then, with the vessel of precious nature bearing the characteristics described before, marked with its own symbols such as the vajra and so forth, one recites one hundred and eight mantras — including those of Vairocana and the rest — and places them outside the outer maṇḍala.

The full vases; pairs of garments numbering one hundred thousand, ten thousand, one thousand, or one hundred; one each, or held in common; streamers of many various kinds; canopies bound with banners adorned at the four corners; victory banners; and pennants — all of these are to be fully recited with the syllable OṂ and with Śrī Vajra Hūṃ, and then offered to all the deities definitively with: Vajra sphāraṇa khaṃ.

One hundred flower trees, or four, and all the trees and all the flowers — together with the fire-vajra mudrā and OṂ Vajra Puṣpe HŪṂ — one thus praises the flower mudrā.

All fragrances, sweet-smelling substances, and pure, fine scents — in the same way, with the fire-vajra and OṂ Vajra Gandhe HŪṂ together with the mudrā of fragrance.

Camphor, aloeswood, dūrva grass, sandalwood, and the like, well blended — in the same way, with the fire-vajra and OṂ Vajra Dhūpe HŪṂ together with the mudrā of incense — one offers incense braziers numbering one hundred thousand, ten thousand, one thousand, one hundred, or however many are available.

Lamps numbering one hundred thousand, ten thousand, one thousand, or one hundred; all lamps set in lamp-stands fitted with blazing torch-pillars, numbering one thousand, ten, or eleven — in the same way, with the fire-vajra and OṂ Vajra Āloke HŪṂ together with the mudrā of butter lamps, one fully recites, then, pronouncing OṂ Sphāraṇa Khaṃ, one makes the offering.

For the food offerings employed at the torma (ritual cake) — numbering one hundred thousand, ten thousand, one thousand, one hundred, or in tens, beginning with those that are auspicious — and for the various edible substances, one likewise fully recites the fire-vajra, then pronounces Akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmāṇām ādyanutpannatvāt, and makes the offering.

Musical instruments — ten, one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, or one hundred thousand, or any number there may be — with the syllable HŪṂ and with the mudrā of music, using the fingers of the vajra fists, one performs the fourteen aspects of the musical posture, as follows: lute; flute; the drum muraja; the drum mukundā; the staff drum; the drum bheri; the drum paṭaha; the drum kuñjā; and the posture of the drum timila.

Music, dramatic performance, dance, ear ornaments, crowns, and similar offerings are all praised with the syllable OṂ.

In the same way, fluttering silk streamers are suspended; garlands of flowers and yak-tail fans adorn the space; nets and half-nets embellish it; half-moons lend it beauty. Horses, elephants, oxen, and chariots are offered — together with the examination of their marks. Those equipped with pleasing bells ringing as they descend the stairway are likewise offered with Vajra Sphāraṇa Khaṃ.

Reciting OṂ Vajrasattva susaṃgṛhīta, Vajraratnam nuttaraṃ, Vajradharma gāyane, Vajrakarma kodbhave, and performing the dance — all eight offerings, from Vajrā the Coquette onward, together with the karma mudrās of the wrathful fists, one thus makes offering to the entire maṇḍala.

The two vajra fists are bound together with the two index fingers fully extended — these are the two wrathful fists.

Once again, with the sixteen karma mudrās of the vajra family maṇḍala as described, one makes excellent offering, and then one supplicates all the wrathful families: "Please accomplish all attainments for the benefit of all sentient beings."

Next, the outer offerings are presented. One places the finest companion of practice within the maṇḍala, and upon the following articles — rice with husks, sesame, water, food, flowers, legumes, and oil in the fist, and other edibles — one recites once again beginning with "A kāro mukhaṃ" and so forth, and scatters them three by three starting from the eastern direction. Incense, flowers, aromatic fumigation, lamps, and ablution water are also offered, at the beginning and at the end. Before all else, one should have the maṇḍalas made. Then the invitation is performed. Then the samaya is shown. Then ablution water is again offered, and with incense and the rest one makes excellent offering and presents the torma. Then one requests the [guests] to depart.

The mantra and mudrā for this are as follows.

Facing east, seated with the right leg extended, one displays the vajra with the left hand and places the right hand at the hip. Drawing in with the right index finger as a hook — this is the mudrā for inviting. The same mudrā without the hooking of the index finger is the samaya mudrā of Śakra (Indra, lord of the gods).

Seated with the left leg extended, extending the index finger from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Namo vajrasya diśi diśi vajrapāṇi rokṣa rakṣa svāhā.

Facing the direction of fire, one curves the index finger of the right hand into a rounded shape, inserts it at the third joint with the middle finger raised, and places the thumb in the palm — this is the mudrā for inviting the fire deity. From the inviting mudrā, showing the thumb alongside the index finger — this is the samaya mudrā of the fire deity. Taking that same mudrā and turning it forward to the center of the hand, then joining them together — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Agne ehi ehyohi kapila jvala jvala daha daha śikhito li birūpākṣa svāhā.

Facing the direction of Yama (the lord of death), with hands directed forward, forming the vajra fist inward with both thumbs at the center and the two ring fingers joined on the outside and raised, then grasped inward again — this is the mudrā for inviting Yama. Crossing the two middle fingers outward and raising them, held at the heart — this is the samaya mudrā. From that same position, joining the middle fingers — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Yamāya svāhā.

Facing the direction of Nirṛti (the lord of the southwest), seated with the feet level, one forms a fist with the right hand, curves and holds the index finger and middle finger, and places it in the manner of a fragrant offering; one places the left hand toward the corner of the hip with the left index finger curved — this is the mudrā for inviting Nirṛti. With that same mudrā, while the left hand remains toward the corner of the hip, the sword mudrā is the samaya mudrā of Nirṛti. Extending the index finger from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Sarva bhūta bhayaṃkara kuru kuru svāhā.

Facing the direction of the water deity, seated with the feet level, one forms a fist with the right hand, joins the thumb and index finger together, places the left fist at the heart, and draws in with the left index finger as a hook — this is the mudrā for inviting the lord of water. With that same mudrā, joining the left index finger into the fist and holding it as a lasso — this is the samaya mudrā of the lord of water. Extending the index finger from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Tṛ tṛ phuṭa tṛ tṛ śi khito li birūpākṣa svāhā.

Facing the direction of the wind deity and seated, one forms a fist with the left hand, raises the middle finger, inserts the tip of the bent index finger at the middle joint, points it forward, and extends it. The right hand is formed in the same way and placed to the side at an angle, with the thumb beckoning — this is the mudrā for inviting the wind deity. Holding that same thumb as before — this is the samaya mudrā of the wind deity. Extending the thumb from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra is: Oṃ svā sa khā kha kha kha svāhā.

Facing directly toward Kubera and seated, one joins both hands together, performs the vajra binding inward with the little fingers crossed and extended. Behind that, the two ring fingers are placed separately with the middle fingers raised — this making the vajra knot — this is the mudrā for inviting Kubera. With that same mudrā, holding the two middle fingers inward with the vajra-middle-finger binding — this is the samaya mudrā of Kubera. Extending the two middle fingers from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra for this is: Oṃ kuberāya svāhā.

Facing the direction of the lord of power (Īśāna) and seated, one joins both hands together in a hollow-palmed gesture, performs the vajra binding with the ring fingers and little fingers against the palm, bends the pair of thumbs leaning upon one another inward and crossed, presses the middle fingers together and raises them, and behind those raised middle fingers places the two index fingers in the vajra formation, then bends those same index fingers so that their nails touch one another above — this is the first mudrā for inviting the lord of power. Holding those index fingers in the vajra formation as before — this is the samaya mudrā of the lord of power. Extending the two index fingers from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantra is: Juṃ juṃ śiva svāhā.

Seated in the posture of resting to the left, one joins both hands together in a hollow-palmed gesture and, looking upward, uses the two index fingers as hooks — this is the mudrā for inviting Brahmā and the others upward.

Holding those same two index fingers as before — this is the samaya mudrā. Extending the two index fingers from the inviting mudrā — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantras for these are: Oṃ ūrdhvaṃ brahmaṇe svāhā. Sūrya grahādhipataye svāhā. Oṃ candra nakṣatrādhipataye svāhā.

Seated in the posture of level steps, one joins both hands together, the fingertips interlaced without gap, the thumbs rounded, and looking downward, uses the index fingers as hooks to invite the goddess of the earth and the others below — this is the mudrā for inviting the goddesses below. Holding those index fingers as before from the inviting mudrā — this is the samaya mudrā. Extending the index fingers — this is the mudrā for requesting departure.

The mantras are: Adho pṛthivye svāhā. Asurebhyaḥ svāhā. Nāgebhyaḥ svāhā.

Then, with one's own mantra, one offers the torma offering to all of them, saying: "Grant that I and the assembly of disciples be free from obstacles. Grant me also the accomplishment of the activity." Then one requests all of them to depart.

Alternatively, one may offer the torma using the verses composed for the sake of Supratiṣṭhita, as follows:

To gods, asuras, yakṣas, serpents, and wanderers,
To sky-farers, garuḍas, those with decaying bodies,
To gandhārvas, rākṣasas, and the hosts of spirits,
And to all those endowed with miraculous powers who dwell upon the earth —
To you together with your sons, wives, and retinues,
I here upon the ground have planted my knees,
And with palms joined I offer you this prayer:

Hear this and come here to bestow your benefit.

Whatever spirits dwell upon the summit of Mount Meru,
In the joyful groves and in the abodes of the gods,
In the mountains of the east and west and in the houses of the sun and moon,
And those who dwell upon every mountain,
By every river and at every river confluence,
Those who dwell especially in places rich with precious things,
By lakes, ponds, marshes, and riverbanks,
And those who dwell in trickling streams and in wells,
In towns and cattle-lord villages and in deserted cities,
In empty buildings and likewise in the temples of the gods,
In the places of shrines and stūpas,
In hermitages and in elephant forests,
In the treasure houses of kings,
At crossroads, four-way junctions, and three-way junctions,
Those along great highways and at the base of solitary trees,
In great charnel grounds and great forests,
In the haunts of lions, bears, and wild beasts,
In great wildernesses and fearsome places,
Those who dwell in the finest island-continents,
And those who dwell in the charnel grounds of Meru —

With garlands, unguents, and fragrance,
With incense, torma offerings, lamps, and this praise,
We respectfully present, offer, and invite you to drink.
May the results of these acts come to be.

Having thus made offerings to the spirits, with one-pointed mind make offerings to the guardians of the directions.

The hosts of gods assembled with Indra of the vajra (Vajrapāṇi), together with their retinues —
Please accept these excellent torma offerings.

The lord of fire and Yama, lord of the rākṣasas devoid of truth,
The lord of water, lord of wind, and lord of wealth,
The powerful gods who are lords of spirits,
The sun and moon above and great Brahmā,
All the gods and the nāgas of the earth,
The gods of the mountains and the assembled hosts of the secret ones —
Together with your armies, clans, sons, and friends,
And the assembled multitudes of your own peoples who are pleased —

Each and every one, bringing your minds to a single intention,
Coming excellently to your respective directions,
Together with your own children, wives, friends and companions,
Your household members, troops, and armies all at once —

Accept these flowers, fragrance, unguents, and lamps,
These food offerings and tormas,
Drink and take your fill of them, drink well.
May the results of these acts come to be.

Now this is the mantra for supremely offering tormas both outer and inner, everywhere:
A kā ro mu khaṃ sar va dhar māṇā mā dya nu tvan tvā ta.

Then one performs the proximate touching. Facing and residing at the eastern gate, in the center of the universal hearth of all activities, one recites the mantras of all the deities of the maṇḍala of the glorious Trailokyavijaya (Conqueror of the Three Worlds), arranges red flowers in proper order, and with the mantra of the glorious Vajrahūṃkāra pours one hundred and eight libations of butter for the homa. From the mantra of the glorious Vairocana onwards, through to the wrathful Vajrāveśa at the end, one likewise pours seven libations for each. Then, just as is proper, the deities beginning with Vairocana are invited into the fire pit by means of flowers alone, and are placed each in their own position in the maṇḍala drawn with the mantras of Vairocana and the rest.

Then, having made prostrations to all the Tathāgatas:

I, called by the great name such-and-such,
A vajra master of great austerity,
For the benefit of all sentient beings
Shall introduce disciples here.

Here, in entering the great maṇḍala, one does not examine whether they are proper vessels or not. Why is that? Venerable Blessed One, certain sentient beings who commit great evil, upon seeing and entering this great maṇḍala of Vajrahūṃkāra, will be freed from all lower rebirths. Blessed One, those who are attached to wealth, food, drink, and all objects of desire —

There are also sentient beings who desire but are unable to keep their sacred commitments (samaya) and to practice mantra and so forth. These too, having entered here with the wish to do whatever they desire, will have all their aspirations fulfilled. Blessed One, there are certain sentient beings who delight in dance, song, laughter, play, and the enjoyment of food, and who, not having penetrated the Mahāyāna nature of reality of all the Tathāgatas, will enter the lineages of the gods and into other maṇḍalas. Yet here, in this maṇḍala of all the lineages where every aspiration is perfectly fulfilled, there arise unsurpassed joy, satisfaction, and delight. Even those who, out of fear and dread of the rules of training, do not enter — for those who abide in happiness on the path leading into the maṇḍala of the lower rebirths, so to speak, even they shall be made to experience supreme joy, contentment, happiness, and mental ease, and shall be turned back from the path that heads toward involvement in all the streams of lower rebirth. For this reason it is appropriate to enter the maṇḍala of Vajrahūṃkāra. Blessed One, as for virtuous sentient beings who seek the awakening of a buddha by means of the perfectly accomplishing the noble moral discipline, meditative absorption, and wisdom of all the Tathāgatas, yet who become afflicted and troubled by striving in the meditative concentrations, the liberations, and the rest, and by striving on the grounds — the moment such persons too have entered this very maṇḍala of Vajrahūṃkāra, they should offer this request: even tathāgatahood itself is not hard to find; what need is there to speak of other spiritual attainments?

Then the disciples are to be introduced. For this purpose, a layman who has fully taken up the five bases of training, or a monk, or one who is fit to be empowered as a vajra master having fully received the vows of a monk — such a person makes prostrations at the feet of the vajra master and recites these words:

You, my Teacher, the Great Joyful One,
Who have revealed the way of great awakening,
I, a great protector, approach you as my refuge.
Bestow upon me those very sacred commitments.
Bestow upon me too the awakening mind.
Bestow upon me too the three refuges.

Then, having bound the face of the disciple with a red upper and lower garment — over which the mantra of Vajrayakṣa has been recited — and with a blindfold over which the mantra of the four door-guardians, Vajra-hook and the rest, has been recited, one leads the disciple forward to make four prostrations. The disciple, holding flowers in hand, makes prostrations to the vajra master and, still holding the flowers, performs confession, rejoicing, exhortation, and supplication, and recites these words:

Lord, bestow vows upon me.
May all the buddhas, the Sages (Munīndras), without exception, look upon me with compassion.
I, called by the great name such-and-such,
Dwelling under the mastery of the vajra master,
Possessing a Saṅgha of irreversible ones
From whom the music of the buddhas arises,
Enter into the supreme city of great liberation,
The great secret.
Great vajra master, lead me in.
Bestow upon me the great fortune
Of irreversible empowerment.
Having supplicated for all the major marks,
Fully endowed with all the minor marks,
The body of a buddha, beautiful and pleasing —
Great vajra master, bestow it upon me.
Empowerment is supremely wondrous.
For the benefit of all sentient beings,
May I always become a vajra master.
Great vajra master, I beseech you.

Then the vajra master makes supplication to all the lineages in his own tradition:

This very one called such-and-such,
Who holds the awakening mind,
Enters here into this secret wheel
And requests the vows of awakening.

Then the vajra master recites the following:

Go for refuge to the Three Jewels —
The buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
May this one's sacred pledges and vows
Of the pure vajra family be made firm.

Take up the vajra and bell mudrā,
O you of great intelligence.
The awakening mind itself is the vajra;
Wisdom is said to be the bell.
Let the vajra masters also take these up —
The guru is equal to all the buddhas.
This is declared to be the vow and sacred pledge
Of the pure vajra family.

The essence of the jewel family is this:
Three times by day and three times by night,
Generosity of the four kinds —
Material goods, fearlessness, the Dharma, and loving-kindness —
Is to be practiced and given forth.
The outer and the secret teachings of the three vehicles,
The sacred Dharma, you must take up and hold.
This is declared to be the sacred pledge and vow
Of the pure lotus family.

In the essence of the great action family,
Be fully endowed with the three vows,
And also perform the work of offering as far as you are able;
Hold these truly and certainly.
The remaining four beyond these
Are taught as defeats of the gravest kind —
They are not to be dropped or cast aside:
These are declared to be the root downfalls.
Three times by day and three times by night,
Recite them daily without fail.
Should you ever transgress them, O yogin,
They will become the heaviest of downfalls.

You must not take the life of any sentient being;
Do not take what is not given;
Do not engage in sexual misconduct;
Do not speak falsehood.
Utterly abandon drinking alcohol,
Which is the very root of all ruin.
Except for the sake of taming sentient beings,
Abandon everything that is improper.
Dwell close to the holy;
Honor and serve the yogins.

The three kinds of bodily action,
The four kinds of speech,
And the three kinds of mental action —
Maintain and guard all of these as best you can.

Do not delight in the lesser vehicle.
Do not turn your back on the welfare of sentient beings.
Do not entirely abandon saṃsāra.
Do not cling perpetually to nirvāṇa.

The secret-holders — gods and asuras —
You must not despise.
Do not ride upon a mudrā or a weapon,
Nor trample upon a symbol or a banner.
These are declared to be the sacred pledges.
O intelligent one, you must guard them all.

The student then recites the following:

O vajra master, be my teacher.
Whatever the sovereign commands me,
So shall I endeavor to act.
Just as the protectors of the three times
Decidedly set beings upon the path to awakening...

The passage from those words onward, up to and including "place sentient beings in nirvāṇa," is to be recited.

For one who does not take up the vows, only the admission itself is to be given; the declaration beginning "today you are called" and so forth is not to be recited, and the empowerment of the vajra master is likewise not to be conferred.

Then, with the mantra oṃ sarva yoga citta mutpādayāmi:

The supreme awakening mind, without superior —
I, the holy one, shall arouse it.
And with its essence, in the heart,
The vajra is to be firmly placed.

This is done with the mantra suratasama yastvaṃ hoḥ vajrasiddhiya thāsukhaṃ.

Then the vajra hūṃ is consecrated with blessing, and offerings of incense, flowers, and the like are made. A garland of flowers is placed upon the student, the face is anointed with fragrant perfume, the supreme gift is received, and those remaining outside are consecrated with vase water. With the mantra oṃ gṛhṇa vajrasamaya hūṃ bhaṃ, one binds oneself with kroṭī riṃ ti ri, and the student is made to enter into binding.

When the vajra is clasped, one utters a cry,
And with the firm vajra of the thumb,
By the wrath of mind one is made to rejoice —
Thus one recalls the wrathful one kroṭī riṃ ti ri.

Then the student is made to hold a flower garland with those same thumbs, and the entry is performed with this essence-mantra: vajrema yaṃ bratīśyāmi.

At the eastern gate the student is drawn in with the vajra hook, and at the southern gate is led in with the lasso. At the western gate is bound with the iron chain, and at the northern gate is brought down with the vajra bell.

Again the student is led in through the eastern gate in the same manner, and these words are spoken: "Today, by the vajra family of all the Tathāgatas, I shall now arouse in you the vajra wisdom — that wisdom by which one attains the supreme accomplishment of all the Tathāgatas. What need is there to speak of other accomplishments? You must not speak of this before those who have not seen the maṇḍala. Should you break your samaya, your head will be split asunder."

Then the vajra master himself forms the wrathful mudrā kroṭī riṃ ti ri with upward-gazing eyes, binds it, places it on the crown of the student's head, and speaks these words: "This is the vajra of your samaya. If you disclose it to anyone, your head will be split apart."

Then with that very samaya mudrā and with water over which the oath essence-mantra has been recited once, the student is made to drink. The oath essence-mantra is as follows:

May Vajrasattva enter truly
Into your heart this very day.
If you disclose this matter,
He departs immediately and is gone.
Vajra uṃka ṭhaḥ.

Then the student is addressed in these words: "From this day forward, I am your Vajrapāṇi. Whatever I command you to do with the words 'Do this,' you must do it. Do not hold me in contempt. If you do not abandon your pride and you die in that state, you will fall into hell."

After this, the master visualizes at his own heart center the syllable A, adorned with a garland of rays of vajra light. Then, at the student's heart center, navel, throat, and crown, he visualizes blazing five-pointed vajras resting within lunar discs, along with a jewel, a lotus, and a crossed vajra, in that sequence — corresponding to hūṃ, trāṃ, hrīḥ, and aḥ.

With the opening mudrā, he opens both his own and the student's heart centers. He draws forth the syllable from the syllable yaṃ at his own heart center, mentally places it in the center of the vajra residing at the student's heart center, and visualizes it filling the entire body. He recites these words: "May all the Tathāgatas bestow their blessing, and may Vajrasattva descend into me." Then quickly the vajra master forms the wrathful kroṭī riṃ ti ri binding and recites:

This is the samaya vajra,
Known by the name Vajrasattva.
The vajra wisdom is unsurpassed —
May that very one descend upon you.
Vajra āveśa āḥ.

This is recited ten times, twenty times, thirty times, forty times, fifty times, sixty times, seventy times, eighty times, ninety times, and one hundred times — and the descent will certainly occur.

Then, forming the vajra fist, he releases the mudrā of the mind-consort Vajradhātvīśvarī and recites:

Oṃ sumbha ni sumbha hūṃ, gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ, gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇāpaya hūṃ, ānaya ho bhagavan vajravidyārāja hūṃ phaṭ. Aḥ aḥ aḥ aḥ aḥ.

This is recited ten times, twenty times, thirty times, forty times, fifty times, sixty times, seventy times, eighty times, ninety times, and one hundred times.

The Blessed One meanwhile visualizes the vajra wind maṇḍala as completely filled with blazing red rays of light in the form of the vajra hūṃ.

If the descent still does not occur, then at that point the master forms the samaya mudrā for bringing down the vajra, together with a bell, and presses with his left foot upon the student's foot. In the direction of the sky above, in order to draw down into glorious Vairocana, the vajra-hūṃ one, he presses downward with masses of rays of light in the form of the wrathful hūṃ; and from below, too, the vajra wind maṇḍala and the form of hūṃ strike upward.

Likewise, one visualizes that Akṣobhya and the other deities residing in the eastern and other directions bring about the true descent by means of masses of rays of light from their own seed syllables — hūṃ, trāṃ, hrīḥ, aḥ — and one draws them down upon the student. Then the mantra "hūṃ vajra āveśaya aḥ" is to be recited one hundred times.

If the descent still does not occur on account of the student's great accumulation of non-virtue, then at that point one is to purify those non-virtues repeatedly by means of the mudrā for purifying non-virtue.

The fire of blazing juniper and kuśa grass,
combined with wrathful vajra equanimity —
by the offering made thereby,
all that person's non-virtues
are surely burned in a sesame fire-offering.

Reciting "oṃ sarva pāpaṃ dahana vajrāya svāhā," one fashions an image of non-virtue out of black sesame in the palm of the right hand, visualizes the syllable hūṃ at its center, and performs the fire-offering with the ring finger and thumb. Then one visualizes that the blazing garland issuing from the fire-offering hearth — vajras churning on every side — burns away the non-virtues of the student's body. After that, one binds in exactly the same way as when the vajra descended, and performs the descent; it will assuredly occur.

Even so, should the descent still not take place in a particular student, that student is not to be given the empowerment. When it does descend, in that very instant the student's five superknowledges (abhijñā) and the rest are made complete.

Then, having recognized that the true descent has occurred, one again sings the song "oṃ vajrasattva susaṃgṛhīta" and so forth, and releases the mudrā of the wrathful fist together with the Tathāgata Vajra-fire mudrā. When the descent has come, one forms the wrathful mudrā of Vajrasattva and binds. At that point the master binds with the wrathful vajra-fist mudrā. Likewise, for as long as this continues, one then binds with the mudrā of Vajrahāsa. At that point one binds with the wrathful mudrā of Vajradharma. By such means the deity draws near and becomes well-pleased.

Then one visualizes a vajra upon the student's tongue and recites "bruhi vajra." After that, the student will speak everything. Then one throws the garland into the great maṇḍala and recites "brāticcha hoḥ." Whatever deity the garland lands upon is the one through which accomplishment comes. Then, with the words "oṃ pratigṛhṇatu imaṃ sattva mahābala," one binds that same garland upon the student's head.

Then, with the verse "oṃ — today, O Vajrasattva yourself, strive to open your eyes! The vajra eye is unsurpassed; all eyes will be opened" — and with the words "he vajrapāśa," one releases the face covering.

Then, beginning with the vajra-hook of the great maṇḍala, the deities are shown in sequence all the way through to Vairocana at the end.

Then, with the words "tiṣṭha vajra" and what follows, one releases the mudrā of planting the vajra in the student's heart. Next, either in the outer maṇḍala or outside, a lunar maṇḍala facing the eastern gate has been well drawn. One also consecrates the student with the mudrā of glorious Vajrahūṃkāra, the mind-vajra and the rest, places the great mudrā upon him, and confers the empowerment.

One makes offerings of incense, flowers, and the like; presents the offering of water; and proclaims the sounds of parasols, victory banners, pennants, and the like, as well as conches and music. Then, with auspicious verses and heartfelt joy, one first confers — one by one — the water empowerment, the crown empowerment, the silken ribbon empowerment, the vajra empowerment, the master empowerment, and the name empowerment. Having conferred these empowerments, one again makes offerings in the eightfold manner: flowers and the like, and the offering of the graceful one and the rest.

The students, joining their palms in the vajra gesture, bow deeply to the master, offer the highest gift of the preceptor's fee, receive the empowerment of flowers and the like, and take these up.

The manner in which the master confers empowerment is as follows. He places the student in the mudrā of Glorious Vajra-Hūṃkāra exactly as it has been definitively taught, and with the verbal mudrās he arrays upon the student's body the forms of Glorious Vajra-Hūṃkāra and the rest. Then once again, reciting the mantra "Oṃ vajra adhipati tvaṃ abhiṣiñcāmi dṛḍho me bhava jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ hūṃ phaṭ," he recites this one hundred and eight or one thousand times over the vase of complete victory. Then, uttering "Oṃ vajra abhiṣiñca," he takes water from the vase of complete victory with the vajra fist gesture and confers the water empowerment.

He also recites these words:

This is your water of the hells —
if you transgress your samaya, it will burn you.
If you guard your samaya, the attainment
will be accomplished through the water of vajra ambrosia.

The mudrā of the vajra bell
is not to be spoken of to one without a maṇḍala.
And where many people are assembled,
it is not for those who mock or lack faith.

Then, having taken up all the ritual procedures, he praises with the hundred and eight names, grants permission with five verses, and with praise and prophetic declaration he bestows prophecy upon all the students.

Then the secret empowerment arises. Regarding the one who is fit to be empowered as a master — one should cause him to enter all the maṇḍalas and proceed as follows.

The accomplishment of the activities arising from this —
whatever accomplishment one might desire,
the lowest, the middling, and the highest
will all without exception certainly be attained.
The supreme stages are accomplished without obstacle;
what need is there to speak of lesser attainments?
Even buddhahood itself, and the state of sentient being,
and the Vajra Mind — these are not hard to find.

For one from whom accomplishment will certainly emerge,
for one on whom great sins and demons,
obstructions, misleaders, the lord of death,
and the hosts of māras attend,
displaying manifold fears and sharp torments —
those things which attainment overcomes,
upon that great being
they will not arise, will not come to birth.

Through the ritual of fire offering and activity,
accomplishment will certainly and swiftly emerge;
the gods too will be greatly pleased,
and in an instant it will be excellently found.
Diseases, calamities, harms, and the like,
the heaviest and most certain, will be cast far away.
In his land, illness, possession,
plague, and the like will not arise,
and famine, great uproar,
and the armies of foreign foes will be ruined.
Gods and nāgas with great joy
will guard and protect in happiness.
The Four Great Kings,
the world-protecting stars of the constellations,
the yakṣas, the planets, and the rest —
those of great miraculous power — will guard him.

Then the gods, with Śakra (Indra) and the rest,
paying homage again and again,
offering the finest — jeweled parasols and the like —
in their many various forms,
praise with pure intent the sovereign lord Vajrapāṇi:

He who was enlightened before all buddhas,
who has destroyed every stain of unknowing —
Vajra, Vajra, king of vajra-holders,
Vajra, Vajra, Vajra, vajra-holder,
the vajra body, the great body —
to Vajrapāṇi I bow in homage.
Vajra-limbed, most excellent vajra,
blazing vajra, greatly blazing,
vajra force, the great force,
vajra weapon, the great weapon —
Vajrapāṇi, the great gesture,
vajra arrow, supremely piercing,
sharp vajra, the greatly sharp,
great of the great, great ocean,
vajra lotus, great awakening,
awakening, self-arisen buddha,
vast vajra, the greatly vast,
vajra illusion, perfectly purifying,
vajra meteor, great yakṣa,
vajra lotus, perfectly purifying,
vajra wrathful one, greatly fierce,
vajra foe-destroyer, lord of conquest,
vajra terrifier, great protector,
vajra iron hook, accomplishing purpose,
vajra zombie, great zombie —

vajra flesh-eater, the devourer,
vajra yakṣa, great yakṣa,
vajra spirit-seizer, supreme among spirits,
terrifying, the one who causes dread, the ferocious,
fierce, the one who inspires fear, the one who threatens,
difficult to propitiate yet excellent in accomplishment,
vajra excellence, the one who grants delight,
vajra joy, the greatly joyful,
vajra of joy, the one who wields power,
vajra splendor, great splendor,
blazing light, Yama's finisher,
fierce vajra, the greatly fierce,
dense light, the greatly dense,
equal to the expanse of space,
the one who fulfills all hopes,
vajra empowerment, the supreme jewel,
vajra victory banner, ocean of qualities,
vajra wisdom, the greatly wise,
worshipped by an assembly of ten million vidyās,
Hāla hāla, the Great Black One,
great sound, the magnificently adorned,
vajra desire, the greatly desirous,
destroyer of the dregs and defilements of the age,
supreme one who cuts through the stirring of time,
whose face flashes forth lightning tongues,
vajra fire, the supremely fierce,
destroyer of the bright light of ferocity,
face of a thousand solar rays,
red-eyed, the one who creates terror,
radiating light of many wrathful ones,
hands bearing a hundred weapons of the many,
many faces, a thousand bodies too,
coiling, and indeed the body coils,
the mind's nature — without a self-existent body,
abandoning conceptual thought without remainder,
destroyer of ignorance, the Brahmā,
who brings attachment and aversion to their final end,
illusory, all-pervading vajra-bearer,
lance-bearer, three-pointed, seizing and carrying off,
vast attachment, aversion, and delusion,
completely purifying existence and non-existence,
peaceful and tame, of great purity,
who causes buddhas to perfectly realize buddhahood,
the very self of buddhas, the body of buddhas,
vajra excellent-born, vajra mind,
Samantabhadra, the greatly good,
adorned with all the marks,
pervading the self-nature of all elements,
all pure in the essential vajra nature —

Whoever writes down, recites,
always holds the meaning in mind,
or recalls or chooses to listen to this —
they will become equal to Vajrapāṇi.

When the Blessed One had declared these words, Śakra (Indra), Brahmā, and the like, together with their retinues of gods, and gods, humans, asuras, gandharvas, yakṣas, and flesh-eaters, rejoiced in what the Blessed One had spoken for the sake of attaining benefit and happiness. This concludes the single-section tantra known as "The Tantra of the Tathāgata, Arhat, Perfectly Awakened Buddha, King of Splendor Who Completely Purifies All Lower Realms."

This was translated and revised and definitively established by the Indian master, the great venerable teacher Devendra Deva, and by the great Paṇḍita Maṇikaśrījñāna, listened to with reverence, through the monk of the Śākya order, Chos rje dpal, the Chak translator.

In the year of the Monkey, in the waning fortnight of the Staff Month, beginning on the thirteenth day, at the great temple of Paltangpoché, it was completed within fifteen days' time, in the morning of the twelfth day of the waxing fortnight of the Pleiades Month, within the sphere of the glorious guiding deity.

This glorious tantra-king, purifier of the lower realms,
the single section, previously renowned from Kashmir,
through the grace of the Dharma-king, the Paṇḍita supreme in translation,
was excellently propagated by great beings.

This I have translated through the oral instructions
of the glorious Kunga Nyingpo and the venerable Jikmé Jungné Bèpa,
relying on the tradition in India and Nepal,
through the kindness of widely renowned masters.

Following the grammatical texts and the words of the masters,
translated with reverence — for errors,
may the great learned ones grant forgiveness,
and through this virtue may all beings
become the very protector of beings, the great Sage himself.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The Sanskrit title is a standard liturgical transcription into Tibetan letters. "Kalvikadeśanā" (rendered as "One-Sided Examination" following the Tibetan brtag pa phyogs gcig pa) is unusual; the term may indicate a "partial" or "abbreviated" teaching or examination, and some editions may read differently. The doctrinal sense is that this text presents one facet of the broader purification tantra.

The list of bodhisattva names has been reconstructed into Sanskrit following the standard pattern of Tibetan translations of Sanskrit compound names (blo gros = mati, spobs pa = sāhasa, mi g.yo ba = akṣobhya, yangs pa = vistara, etc.). Samantabhadra at the end of the list is the familiar bodhisattva name.

The figure described as "the great Brahmā seated on a lotus throne" in the middle of the assembly refers to the Blessed One himself in his majestic bearing, described through a simile — the Tibetan construction is slightly ambiguous here, and some readers may take it as the Blessed One entering absorption while likened to Brahmā enthroned.  The phrase rendered "unequaled and equal to none" translates the Tibetan mi mnyam pa dang mnyam pa, a standard compound epithet meaning "equal to the unequaled" or "matching the incomparable," a classical superlative formula used for the buddhas' qualities. The rendering chosen conveys the superlative force for a listening audience.

The description of the divine son as having "reached the age of seven, beyond his allotted time" renders dgun bdun lon lags na, meaning he has reached his seventh year of age and his life span has expired. The passage ends mid-sentence in the source, describing ongoing sufferings; the translation reflects this open continuation faithfully.  The phrase "ཟིལ་གྱིས་མི་ནོན་པ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས" is rendered "the Vajra Blessing which cannot be overpowered," where "ཟིལ་གྱིས་མི་ནོན་པ" literally means "not suppressed or overcome by splendor" — a standard Tibetan idiom for indomitable or unsurpassable blessing. The rendering captures the intended sense without distortion.

The mantra syllables are transliterated directly from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit dhāraṇī passages, which are preserved as liturgical utterances per convention and not translated.  The mantra syllables throughout this passage are rendered as transliterated Sanskrit phonetic approximations as they appear in the Tibetan phonetic transcription. The Tibetan orthography for these mantras is highly variable and sometimes corrupt, and the reconstruction of the underlying Sanskrit is approximate in several cases. The identifications of individual mantras with named goddesses or bodhisattvas follow the Tibetan labels given after each mantra. The phrase rendered "Lady of Grace" for སྒེག་མོ (literally "elegant one" or "beautiful lady") refers to a specific offering goddess, likely Lāsyā. Similarly, the Garland Lady is Mālyā, the Song Lady is Gītā, the Dance Lady is Nṛtyā, the Incense Lady is Dhūpā, the Flower Lady is Puṣpā, the Lamp Lady is Dīpā, and the Perfume Lady is Gandhā — the standard set of eight inner offering goddesses in tantric maṇḍala practice. The text ends mid-sentence, broken off at the introduction of the dedicatee, as the continuation belongs to the next passage.  The wrathful binding called "Tiri-Tiri" is a mudrā with an associated ritual phrase; the term functions as a technical name for the gesture and its syllables, and is left as-is following the Tibetan. The mantra syllables "OṂ GṚHṆA VAJRA SAMAYA HŪṂ PHAṂ" and "Vajra-jī-hvā" are transliterated from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit mantra strings; their precise Sanskrit orthography may vary in different witnesses of this text. The "vajra-half-seat" likely refers to the ardha-vajrāsana, a half cross-legged posture, though some commentaries may interpret it differently.  The text is a detailed ritual manual specifying a sequence of mudrās and their corresponding mantras for the binding of obstructing forces and consecration of the maṇḍala space. The mantras are rendered as closely as possible to their phonetic form in the Tibetan transcription, as they are Sanskrit dhāraṇī-style formulas without fully normalizable Sanskrit orthography in all cases. "VAJRA NETRĪ BANDHA SARVA VIGHNA DĪNA" is a title-phrase rather than a grammatically complete mantra sentence. "VAJRA HŪṂ-maker" renders the Tibetan name for the deity or mudrā principle associated with the syllable HŪṂ in the vajra-family context.  The passage ends mid-sentence with the lamp mudrā mantra introduced but not yet given; this is simply where the source text breaks off, and the translation reflects that accurately.

The name placeholder rendered as "so-and-so by name" translates the Tibetan convention "ཆེ་གེ་མོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ," which indicates the spot where the practitioner inserts their own name.

The Sanskrit mantras are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan; some syllables are liturgically adapted forms and do not correspond to normalized classical Sanskrit, so no correction has been made.  The passage contains a dense sequence of Sanskrit mantras transliterated into Tibetan script. The Sanskrit reconstructions follow the most plausible phonological readings of the Tibetan transliterations, which are at several points irregular or compressed; they are rendered as faithfully as possible without editorial normalization. The mantra syllables themselves are reproduced as-is for liturgical accuracy rather than corrected to standard Sanskrit.

The term rendered "the four specific discriminating knowledges" translates a standard Mahāyāna technical term referring to the four kinds of analytical knowledge (pratisaṃvit): of phenomena, meaning, etymology, and eloquence. It is left as a descriptive phrase here rather than introducing a new technical gloss mid-passage.  The phrase rendered "every wrong descent" translates "log par ltung ba thams cad," which literally means "all wrong fallings" or "all evil rebirths / bad destinies." The rendering captures the sense of falling into lower states of existence through wrongdoing.

The hymn title "Unequaled, Unmoved" is a rendering of the Tibetan "mnyam med mi g.yo," the name of a particular praise-text; this cannot be identified with certainty from context alone, but the translation preserves the title as given.

The final verse on taking up the ācāryas is somewhat compressed in Tibetan; "uphold" renders "gzung bar bgyi," which here means to take them as one's own, to commit oneself to them. This is consistent with tantric refuge and vow-taking contexts.  The text is a tantric ritual manual blending Tibetan instruction with Sanskrit mantras given in Tibetan transliteration. All Sanskrit mantras have been rendered in standard Sanskrit orthography for clarity in narration; the Tibetan phonetic spellings are not reproduced. The phrase "the lion of the Śākyas" renders Śākya-siṃha, a standard epithet of the Buddha Śākyamuni meaning the lion of the Śākya clan. The term "mind-mother" renders sems ma, which in this vajra-bond context refers to a specific tantric mudrā configuration. The final Sanskrit phrase Om pratigṛhṇa tvam imaṃ sattvaṃ mahā-bala is a standard formula of reception and is left in Sanskrit as it functions as a mantra within the ritual sequence.  The epithet Śākya Sengge — literally "Lion of the Śākyas" — is a standard epithet of Śākyamuni and is rendered as such. The sequence of mudrā descriptions in the latter portion is highly technical and compressed; the translation follows the Tibetan closely, but some anatomical instructions for hand gestures may admit alternative interpretations depending on the living transmission. The phrase rendered "armoured in the armour of the two syllables" refers to a standard armour-mantra practice using two seed syllables; the exact syllables are indicated by context in the preceding rite.  The passage is a dense ritual enumeration of mudrā descriptions keyed to named deities and qualities. Several deity epithets in this section function as mudrā names whose underlying Sanskrit is uncertain from the Tibetan alone: "Amoghapāśa" for མཐོང་བ་དོན་ཡོད is a standard identification in the Tibetan iconographic tradition. The epithet བཟང་སྐྱོང ("Samantabhadra" or possibly "Viśvabhadra, the good guardian") is rendered as Samantabhadra following the most common identification in this tantric context. The term སེ་གོལ་གཏོགས་པ, rendered "the back of the hand," is somewhat obscure and may indicate a specific gesture-name not fully transparent from the Tibetan; this is noted as potentially requiring specialist iconographic consultation.  The five uṣṇīṣa figures praised in the verses — Vajra Uṣṇīṣa, Jewel Uṣṇīṣa, Lotus Uṣṇīṣa, Variegated Uṣṇīṣa, and Uṣṇīṣa of Brilliant Splendor — correspond to the five uṣṇīṣa-deities associated with the five buddha families in the Uṣṇīṣavijayā-related maṇḍala cycle. Their individual epithets reflect the qualities of the five wisdoms: Vajra Uṣṇīṣa corresponds to mirror-like wisdom, Jewel Uṣṇīṣa to the wisdom of equality, Lotus Uṣṇīṣa to discriminating wisdom, Variegated Uṣṇīṣa to all-accomplishing wisdom, and the Uṣṇīṣa of Brilliant Splendor to dharmadhātu wisdom. The passage ends mid-sentence, as this is a continuation text.  The phrase rendered "the fierce one" translates Drakpo, an epithet that in this context most likely refers to Rudra or Maheśvara as a world-guardian deity distinct from Brahmā and Indra, though it could also denote a separate class of fierce deity. Given the liturgical list context, this identification is plausible but not certain.

The phrase "Vajra Descent" for rdo rje 'bebs pa is a liturgical terminus marking the end of a sequence of maṇḍala mantras; its precise referent depends on the specific tantra tradition, and the exact demarcation of the mantra sequence is left open here as the text signals continuation.  The phrase "བདེན་བྲལ་རྩིབས་ལ་བཞུགས་ནས་ནི" in the context of Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya is rendered "dwelling on the spoke free of the extreme of truth," understanding "bden bral" as indicating freedom from extreme positions regarding truth rather than "lacking truth." The exact doctrinal nuance here may relate to specific tantric maṇḍala geography that the broader text makes clearer. The passage overall is a sādhana text describing visualization of the eight Uṣṇīṣa Tathāgatas in a wheel maṇḍala arrangement; the mantras embedded in the text are transliterated Sanskrit and are kept as-is per convention.  The four goddesses named here by conventional short epithets, beginning with "Sgegs mo" (the Graceful One), correspond to the standard four offering goddesses of tantric maṇḍalas: Lāsyā (graceful gesture), Dhūpā (incense), Puṣpā (flowers), Dīpā (lamps) and so on; the text abbreviates, so the translation follows that brevity rather than supplying a full list not present in the Tibetan.

The name rendered "Amoghādarśana" (meaning-Seeing the Meaningful) is a reconstructed Sanskrit for "mthong ba don yod," literally "whose seeing is meaningful/not empty," a standard epithet-name in this ritual context.

"Durgativiśodhana" is reconstructed from "ngan song spong 'joms pa," literally "he who rejects and destroys the lower destinies," a well-attested bodhisattva name.

"Viniścitamati" is reconstructed from "nges 'joms blo gros," literally "intellect of thorough resolution/conquest."  The phrase rendered "the ultimate reaches of the vajra descent" translates a technical tantric expression describing the culminating point of the empowerment sequence. The precise ritual referent depends on the broader text's system and is left without further elaboration here.

The term rendered "Vajra-of-Mind consort" and the parallel consort figures are the four vajra-consorts associated with the four families of Tathāgatas in this maṇḍala system; they function as empowerment-conferring consorts, not independent deities.  The verse beginning "Those who are matchless, immovable" is a hymn of praise whose syntax is at times compressed and elliptical. The phrase rendered "a hundred tongues" follows the Tibetan literally and refers to the ritual convention of imagining oneself offering praise simultaneously through innumerable tongues, a standard tantric visualization idiom. The "four goddesses beginning with the Graceful One" likely refers to the four offering goddesses of the inner maṇḍala: Lāsyā, Mālyā, Gītā, and Nṛtyā, with Lāsyā as the Graceful One. The "five kinds of cow-products" is the standard pañcagavya purification mixture of milk, curd, butter, urine, and dung. "Noble Shoulders" (Tib. dpung pa bzang po) is a proper name, likely of a specific praised figure or a verse text attributed to such a figure; this identification is uncertain.  The opening phrase names a meditative absorption whose title echoes the preceding chapter's content, functioning as a colophon element before the new chapter begins.

The phrase rendered "devoid of truth" for "rnam par 'joms pa bden bral" is somewhat compressed in the source. It may refer to a deity or symbolic figure whose characteristic is the absence of inherent truth or conceptual elaboration, but the exact iconographic identity is not fully specified in the text as given.

The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan and are standard Tantric Sanskrit dhāraṇī-style formulas; no normalization has been applied beyond standard romanization conventions.  The passage contains a sequence of Sanskrit mantra syllables rendered phonetically in Tibetan script: "Jaḥ Hūṃ Vaṃ Hoḥ" are standard tantric invitation syllables; "Bhagavān ehyehi Mahākaruṇika dṛśya hoḥ" means roughly "Blessed One, come, O Great Compassionate One, appear, hoḥ." These have been transliterated rather than translated, as they are mantra formulas.

The figure addressed as "Vajradhara" at the opening of the second section is rendered as "the Blessed One, Vajradhara" following the Tibetan "བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཛིན་པ" — this could refer either to the deity Vajradhara as the interlocutor or to Vajrapāṇi in his role as Vajradhara; the context of a question-and-answer dialogue suggests it is a named bodhisattva asking the Blessed One a question, but the syntax is slightly ambiguous.  The dhāraṇī is transliterated as it appears in the Tibetan and rendered without translation in keeping with standard practice for mantric speech.

The phrase rendered "the twelve deeds of a buddha" refers to the classical enumeration of the twelve acts of a buddha's life, such as descending from Tuṣita, taking birth, renouncing the world, and so forth.

The compound "the Vanquisher" and "Mass of Splendor," "Uṣṇīṣa of the Victor," and "Victorious One" are epithets or names of specific deities or buddha qualities associated with these mudrās in the ritual tradition; the Tibetan names have been rendered literally throughout.  The passage contains a scribal error in the Tibetan: the absorption name near the fourth dhāraṇī reads "རྣམ་པར་འཇོསམ་པ" which is clearly a transposition for "རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་པ" and has been translated accordingly as "Vanquisher."

The names of the four Tathāgatas in the cardinal directions of the maṇḍala follow the standard Vajradhātu arrangement: Akṣobhya in the east, Ratnasambhava in the south, Amitābha in the west, and Amoghasiddhi in the north. The Tibetan does not name them explicitly in the verse but refers to them by epithet; the rendering preserves the epithets while the identification is doctrinally unambiguous.

The passage ends mid-sentence, broken off at the point where the text discusses protection from the Lord of Death and serpent-fear, consistent with this being a continuation passage.  The empowerment mantras are presented as a liturgical sequence and rendered in normalized Sanskrit transliteration throughout; minor orthographic variations in the Tibetan transcription are regularized silently. The phrase rendered "press it with the left vajra" refers to the left-hand vajra implement held during the rite, consistent with tantric ritual conventions. The sequence "recite one hundred thousand times" refers to recitation of the preceding awareness-mantra in the presence of the painted deity image.  The four Great Kings are identified here by their traditional epithets and associations: Vaiśravaṇa rules the north and is lord of yakṣas and wealth; Dhṛtarāṣṭra rules the east and is lord of gandharvas; Virūḍhaka rules the south and is lord of kumbhāṇḍas; Virūpākṣa rules the west and is lord of nāgas. These identifications are consistent with standard Buddhist cosmology and are reflected in the iconographic descriptions that follow.

The term rendered "heart-essence" throughout is snyingpo, which in mantra contexts denotes the core or seed mantra of a deity or being — not "essence" in a purely philosophical sense but specifically the condensed mantra-heart of a protective deity.

The final line of the passage ends mid-sentence in the source text, indicating the passage continues. The translation reflects this open ending accordingly.  The phrase rendered "the form of the sun and the form of the pig" refers to iconographic placement markers in the maṇḍala diagram; the pig-face (vārāhī-related) and sun-disk are standard orientation symbols in this ritual context. The verse section here is terse and elliptical, and the maṇḍala instruction lines admit some ambiguity in their exact referents.

The name rendered "Bidentāḷa" translates the Tibetan for "the great lord of the rākṣasas" whose epithet is bdengbral, meaning "devoid of truth" or "without truth-bonds." The translation renders it descriptively as his characterizing epithet in context. The Sanskrit correlate is uncertain.  The eighth planet in this list poses a minor question: the Tibetan "sgra can" appears twice in slightly different contexts. In the line listing directions it names the direction of the rākṣasas, where sgra can ordinarily designates Rāhu, the eclipse-demon. However, one of the eight already named as Rāhu appears in front. In Indo-Tibetan astrological tradition the eight great planets sometimes include both Rāhu and Ketu as distinct eclipse nodes. The translation renders both occurrences as Rāhu following the most common Tibetan convention, but the second instance may intend Ketu; this does not affect the ritual meaning materially.

The phrase rendered "lord of all elemental spirits" translates dbang ldan, literally "the powerful one" or "the one possessed of lordship," used here as an epithet of Śakra. The text names him as lord of the 'byung po, elemental or spirit beings, and the gloss on Śakra as Indra is given on the preceding passage per the continuity instructions.  The phrase rendered "moments, instants, and brief intervals of time" translates three near-synonymous Tibetan temporal terms (skad cig, thang cig, yud tsam), representing progressively brief units of time in Indic cosmological reckoning; no single English word covers all three, so they are rendered by approximation.

The term "phuṭ" appearing as a ritual utterance is the same sound as the seed-syllable used in the preceding mantras; the text plays on its double use as a formal offering cry and as a mantra syllable. This is reflected in the translation but a listener should be aware the same sound functions in both registers.

The final two lines are the opening of a new verse section; the passage breaks off mid-description, consistent with the source being a continuous text whose next section follows immediately.  The term "Phud" throughout this passage is a transliteration of a Tibetan ritual term for a kind of essence-extraction rite or oblation used in poison-healing contexts; it likely corresponds to a Sanskritic term such as pūtī or a localized ritual designation. Its precise Sanskrit equivalent is not established with certainty.

The passage "hands like a snake's-head snare" renders a description of a hand gesture or technique used in extracting poison; the syntax of the verse is compressed and somewhat telegraphic, as is typical of ritual instruction texts.

The figure "the great lord of the great serpents" renders "lto 'phye chen po'i bdag po," literally "the lord of the great serpent," which may refer to a nāga-king or to a deity associated with nāgas; the surrounding context of eight Mātṛkās suggests this is a named figure in a Mahāyoga-style retinue, though the specific identification is not given in this passage.  The opening lines of this passage continue directly from the previous passage's list of attainments; the phrase "wheel-turning knowledge-holder" renders rig-'dzin 'khor-los-sgyur-ba, a compound that fuses the tantric vidyādhara-cakravartin title, denoting the highest of the five vidyādhara levels in some classifications, though here it appears as a single item in a list of worldly powers bestowed by the subjugated deity.

The phrase rendered "Goodly-power" translates stobs-bzang, likely a deity name or epithet within this particular maṇḍala system; its precise referent may vary by tradition.  The series of stirring, shaking, blazing, rejoicing, and playing of the maṇḍalas is a standard sixfold or expanded-sixfold auspicious-vibration formula common in tantric literature; the repetition is intentional and formulaic, not an error.

The Tathāgata "King of Splendor with Immeasurable Accumulations of Life, Merit, and Wisdom" renders Tibetan Tshe dang bsod nams dang ye shes kyi tshogs dpag tu med pa gzi brjid kyi rgyal po, a figure central to longevity-ritual literature associated with this text; the name is kept in full as it is a proper epithet, not a description to be paraphrased.

The passage ends mid-sentence, introducing the Wrathful One to the left of the central figure; the text continues beyond this excerpt.  The passage contains an antinomian ethical section — the samaya vows — that presents a stark juxtaposition: standard Mahāyāna precepts followed by explicit permission to kill enemies of the Dharma, take wealth by force, speak falsehood, and make use of another's wife, all justified by compassionate or ritual intent. This is standard Vajrayāna transgressive soteriology and has been rendered literally as the text demands, without softening.

The phrase rendered "ancient divinity of worship" translates a Tibetan expression meaning an old image or icon of a deity used in ritual veneration; the precise referent is that such a deity's shadow should not be stepped on, just as the guru's shadow is not to be trodden upon.

The final line breaks off mid-sentence in the source, indicating the passage continues.  The passage shifts mid-sentence at the very end, cutting off in the Tibetan; the final phrase is syntactically incomplete. The translation preserves this as an open continuation, consistent with the text breaking off.

The phrase rendered "essence-syllable" translates a term that in context refers to the practitioner's root or seed-syllable used as a focal point in visualization. The word "bon" appearing twice in the Tibetan source appears to be a scribal rendering of the Sanskrit bīja, the seed-syllable; this reading is adopted in translation.

The sequence in which the Blessed One's words and the gods' responses are attributed is slightly convoluted in the Tibetan; the translation follows the most coherent reading, where the final exclamations of wonder and joy are the gods' words, not the Blessed One's.  The term rendered "fence" or "encircled by a fence" translates the Tibetan mu ran, a technical term in fire-offering ritual denoting the enclosing border of the fire-pit installation; "fence" or "enclosure" is the standard rendering in this context.

The "five acts of immediate retribution" are the five ānantarya-karmas: killing one's mother, killing one's father, killing an arhat, wounding a buddha, and causing a schism in the Saṅgha.

The passage shifts fluidly between prose instructions and verse without explicit markers; the verse sections here are rendered as verse on the basis of the metrically structured original.  The phrase rendered "Conqueror of the Three Worlds" reflects a common wrathful sādhana self-visualization epithet, here qualifying the practitioner's ritual identity. The passage transitions abruptly from verse into prose, marking a shift in the text's genre; this is preserved in the translation structure. The final sentence breaks off mid-enumeration, reflecting the source passage's continuation into the next segment.  The passage names several deity-holders by their hand-implement: "the one who holds the precious jewel" renders Ratnākaraśānti's conventional placeholder for a jewel-hand deity (likely Ratnasambhava or a Ratnādhārin figure), and "the one who holds the variegated" likely refers to Viśvapāṇi or a similar deity associated with the north. These identifications are contextually reasonable but depend on the specific textual tradition of this maṇḍala chapter.

The phrase "the dark quarter" for the praised direction of wrathful rites renders the standard Indic convention that the dark or southern quarter is associated with fierce activities; no doctrinal ambiguity is involved.  The expression rendered "Blessed Great One" translates Bhagavān Mahī or a compound title; the Tibetan Bcom ldan che ge mo is a somewhat unusual epithet. "Che ge mo" can mean "the Great One" or "the Magnificent," and the phrase likely renders a Sanskrit title such as Bhagavān Mahī or a similar honorific. This is not a standard epithet and the exact Sanskrit original is uncertain.

The phrase "purification is sprinkled" renders bsang gtor, a ritual action involving the sprinkling or dispersal of purifying water or substance, here empowered by recitation of a wrathful mantra.

The "road of a hundred castings" in the tooth-wood divination passage is a somewhat compressed phrase; it likely means "among a hundred castings of the tooth-wood" or "in the practice of throwing the tooth-wood repeatedly," indicating a probabilistic or repeated-observation context.  The phrase rendered "the Great One" throughout this passage corresponds to the term Mahāvajradhara or a similarly exalted tantric deity-title; the Tibetan "che ge mo" is a phonetic transcription used in some tantric contexts as a divine epithet or deity-name, and its exact Sanskrit referent in this particular text is uncertain. It may represent a title of Mahāvajrasattva or a similar apex deity of the maṇḍala system described.

The "seven families" refers to the seven buddha-families of the Sarvavid or Vairocana-system tantra context, consistent with the mention of Sarvavid below.

"Sarvavid" is a Tibetan phonetic rendering of the Sanskrit title meaning "Omniscient One," here denoting a specific tantric deity identity (Sarvavid Vairocana), not simply a general epithet.  The phrase rendered "planetary faces" translates a term that literally means something like "nakṣatra faces" or "asterism-faced ones," referring to astral or stellar beings with semi-demonic associations; the reading here is consistent with the yakṣa and astral-spirit grouping in the context of becoming obedient servants. The four female figures — Lochanā, Māmakī, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, and Tārā — are the four buddha-consorts (Skt. devī) of the standard Vajrayāna maṇḍala tradition; no Sanskrit glosses are supplied for them beyond Tārā, which appears in the house glossary. The phrase "opening of the eyes" renders the ritual technical term for the consecration ceremony in which the deity's presence is invited into the image.  The phrase rendered as "the blazing sign" refers to an auspicious fire omen during the homa ritual that indicates the deceased has been reborn in a higher realm; the grammar of the line "ཇི་སྲིད་མཚན་མ་འབར་བ་ཡི་གནས་སུ་ཡང་དག་སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར" is somewhat compressed and could alternatively be read as "they will be born in a realm where blazing signs are present," meaning a divine realm marked by luminosity; the rendering chosen follows the contextual flow of the surrounding passage about fire omens.

The "corpse" passage near the end is a technical instruction regarding the bodies of beings who have died while in a divine or semi-divine state, which in the tantric ritual context require special purificatory treatment before being used or honored in the homa procedure. This reading is contextually supported, though the passage is compressed.  The phrase rendered "Sarvavidyā" preserves the Sanskrit divine-mantra name as it appears transliterated in the Tibetan. It refers to the dhāraṇī of that name and serves as a consecrating agent applied to the body's principal points.

The "five products of the cow" is a standard ritual purification compound of milk, curds, butter, urine, and dung, well attested in Indo-Tibetan ritual literature.

The passage "starting from eight of the Victor and what follows, one should fully examine one hundred and eight" is structurally compressed in the original and likely refers to a specific ritual count enumerated in an accompanying commentary or the fuller text; the translation preserves the literal sense without over-interpreting.  The section describing the iconographic forms of the deities is a catalogue of tantric deity visualizations, including Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, and vajra-family wrathful figures incorporated into a Buddhist ritual matrix. The passage moves from a doctrinal statement on liberation to a liturgical-iconographic register without transition, which is characteristic of dhāraṇī-related sūtra literature of this genre.

The figure referred to as "the Great God (Śiva)" earlier in this text corresponds here to the deity described as "the powerful one with the blue throat" — Nīlakaṇṭha Paśupati — and the mantra confirms his identity as Śiva in his form as Lord of Beasts; the gloss is not repeated in the body as per instructions.

The phrase rendered "holding a captive person and devouring him" for the left hand of Vajraraktapīta the Wrathful reflects a wrathful iconographic convention; the Tibetan literally describes grasping and consuming a human being, a standard element of such fierce deity depictions.  The term rendered "kulika bird vehicle" translates bya ku li ka, which may refer to a specific mythological bird associated with the nāga realm. The precise identification is uncertain but the name is left as kulika following the text.

The phrase rendered "nīca vehicle" translates ne tso'i shing rta, where ne tso is a transliteration of uncertain Sanskrit origin. It may denote a particular class of low or base creature used as a mount; left partially transliterated rather than invented.

"Vajra-tirinṭiri" translates rdo rje ṭi rin ṭi ri, a tantric implement or cord-binding whose precise nature is not fully established in the secondary literature; the transliterated Sanskrit form is preserved.

"Pheṭaka" translates phe ṭa ka, a term for what appears to be a type of bound or wrapped implement, possibly a skull-staff variant; left in transliteration.  The plant and mineral names in the verse listing maṇḍala-vase contents — singhri, vyāghra-giri, bebere — are Sanskrit or hybrid terms left untranslated as they appear to be technical pharmacological or ritual substance names whose exact identification is uncertain and which the tradition treats as proper names. The Tibetan here is rendering them phonetically rather than semantically.

The phrase rendered "the fifth" at the end of the verse refers to barley as the fifth of the five grains; the commentary gloss in the final line of the verse is a standard explanatory couplet summarizing what the verse enumerates.

The term translated "lord-empowerment" reflects the Tibetan བདག་པོ་ལ་སོགས་པ, literally "the lord and so forth," which in the context of nine empowerments refers to the empowerment of the master or lord. The full enumeration of the nine empowerments is not spelled out in this passage.  The section containing mudrā instructions is a technical sādhana text describing hand gestures in highly compressed verse. The names of individual finger positions and fist configurations — such as "Victor of the Three Worlds" and "treasury fist" — are standard tantric mudrā designations that resist fully transparent rendering; the translations given follow the literal Tibetan closely and reflect conventional usage in this genre. The term "anointing mudrā" for the gesture described as "fully extending" follows the likely sense of byug pa as a smooth, extending, or anointing action.  The passage contains a sequence of seed syllables mapped to specific tantric deities — Hūṃ, Trāṃ, Hrīḥ, Āḥ — which are standard Vajradhātu assignments and are left untranslated as proper bīja syllables per tantric convention.

The term rendered "Vajra Bhṛkuṭi" in the verse section refers to the deity Vajra Bhṛkuṭi (Vajra Bhṛkuṭī, the wrathful vajra deity with furrowed brows), consistent with the preceding passage's mention of that deity.

The phrase "those abiding at the end" in the final paragraph is somewhat condensed in the original; it likely refers to the consort figures at the outer positions of the maṇḍala, in contrast to the central figure.  The passage is a dense, semi-versified ritual manual describing successive mudrā formations for a sequence of deity classes — Maitreya, wrathful vajra deities, the lord of the assembly, messengers, servants, mother goddesses including Umā, and finally "the great gods" (Śiva and others assimilated into the maṇḍala). The verse sections are formulaic lists of physical gestures rather than continuous narrative, and some lines are genuinely elliptical; the translation preserves the sequence faithfully while rendering them as naturally as the source allows.

The phrase rendered "the nameless one abiding at the crown" is cryptic in context; it may refer to an undesignated seed-syllable or a deity whose name is deliberately withheld in the outer transmission. This is a potentially consequential obscurity but cannot be resolved without the root tantra's commentary.  The Sanskrit phrases OṂ Vajra Puṣpe HŪṂ, OṂ Vajra Gandhe HŪṂ, OṂ Vajra Dhūpe HŪṂ, and OṂ Vajra Āloke HŪṂ are the standard offering mantras for flowers, fragrance, incense, and light respectively in the Vajradhātu and related maṇḍala rituals. The phrase Akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmāṇām ādyanutpannatvāt is a well-known Mahāyāna formula meaning "The syllable A is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are primordially unarisen." The list of drum names — muraja, mukundā, bheri, paṭaha, kuñja, timila — are Sanskrit instrument names rendered phonetically in Tibetan; the translation preserves them as proper names. The term "Vajrā the Coquette" renders rdo rje sgeg mo, the first of the eight inner offering goddesses (the vajra-beauties) standard in these maṇḍala liturgies.  The "finest companion of practice" renders སྒྲུབ་པའི་གྲོགས་མཆོག, a technical ritual term for a specially designated offering substance or assistant used in sādhana practice; the exact referent depends on the broader ritual context of this tantra.

The directional deity བདེན་བྲལ is rendered "Nirṛti" (the deity of the southwest direction in the standard aṣṭadikpāla scheme); the Tibetan name literally means "devoid of truth," which is an unusual rendering and may reflect a local orthographic or scribal variant.  The term rendered "lord of power" is Īśāna, the deity of the northeast direction, whose Tibetan epithet དབང་ལྡན literally means "the one possessing power or lordship."

The figure Supratiṣṭhita (Tibetan དཔུང་བཟང) is a bodhisattva who appears in certain tantric and dhāraṇī texts; the reference here is to verses composed in connection with a ritual narrative involving that figure.

The phrase འདབ་བཟང (literally "good wings") is a standard Tibetan rendering of garuḍa (Skt. garuḍa), the divine eagle-being; it is translated here as "garuḍas" for clarity. The term ལུས་སྲུལ་པོ, literally "those with rotting bodies," likely refers to a class of pretas or zombic beings; rendered as "those with decaying bodies" without further specification.  The phrase rendered "cattle-lord villages" translates a term meaning villages presided over by a deity of livestock. The exact nuance is slightly uncertain but the sense is of villages under the protection of such a deity.

The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan and are left in their liturgical form without further rendering, as is standard for dhāraṇī and mantra passages.

The final sentence is syntactically incomplete, breaking off mid-clause, as the source passage itself does; this is a textual continuation point and not a translation error.  The phrase rendered "the great secret wheel" refers to the maṇḍala of Vajrahūṃkāra, with "wheel" (cakra) functioning as a synonym for maṇḍala. The passage "ངན་སོང་གི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་ལམ་དུ་ཇི་ལྟར་གནས་པའི་བདེ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས་ཅན" is densely compressed. The rendering follows the most doctrinally coherent reading: these beings are momentarily situated in a happy state of existence even while on a path oriented toward lower rebirths, and the maṇḍala entrance redirects them. The phrase "སངས་རྒྱས་རོལ་མོ་འབྱུང་བ་ཡི" could alternatively mean "from which arises the celebration of the buddhas" rather than "the music of the buddhas," but both readings point to the same ceremonial context.  The mantra syllables throughout this passage are given in Tibetan phonetic transcription of Sanskrit mantras. The rendering here follows the Tibetan closely; some syllables such as kroṭī riṃ ti ri and the binding verse mantras are wrathful deity seed-syllables associated with the four karmas and the gates of the maṇḍala, but the precise deity affiliations would require consultation of a specific ritual commentary. The gesture of anointing and garlanding before vase empowerment is a standard preparatory rite in Vajrayāna initiation sequences. The "four kinds of generosity" in the jewel family vows follow the standard Mahāyāna enumeration of material goods, fearlessness, Dharma, and loving-kindness. The passage "from those words onward up to placing sentient beings in nirvāṇa" refers to a standard bodhicitta aspiration formula that the text presupposes the reader knows; it is not reproduced here in the source.  The consort figure whose mudrā is released is identified in the text as "sems ma rdo rje ma," meaning Vajradhātvīśvarī, the queen or mind-consort associated with Vairocana. The rendering "mind-consort" reflects her designation as "sems ma" (mind-woman or mind-consort) within the tantra's own vocabulary.

The phrase rendered "glorious Vairocana, the vajra-hūṃ one" translates "dpal rdo rje hūṃ mdzad," a well-attested epithet meaning "the glorious one who performs the vajra hūṃ," understood in this context as a name or form of Vairocana.  The mantra strings — "hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ aḥ," "oṃ sarva pāpaṃ dahana vajrāya svāhā," "oṃ vajrasattva susaṃgṛhīta," "bruhi vajra," "brāticcha hoḥ," "oṃ pratigṛhṇatu imaṃ sattva mahābala," "tiṣṭha vajra," and the auspicious verse "oṃ deriṃ vajrasattva" — are retained in their reconstructed Sanskrit forms as ritual formulae; these are not translated but phonetically rendered as they appear in the Tibetan.

The phrase rendered "the graceful one and the rest" translates sgeg mo la sogs pa, which in tantric offering contexts refers to the offering goddess of beauty or elegance among the standard set of eight offering goddesses; this is a conventional reference to the inner offering goddesses of the maṇḍala.  The verse passage beginning "This is your water of the hells" is presented in the source as a quotation spoken during the water empowerment; the translation preserves its strophic character.

The term rendered "vajra zombie" (rdo rje ro langs) is a compound referencing the vetāla or animated corpse figure in tantric iconography — a well-attested wrathful aspect in the Vajrapāṇi cycle. The translation preserves the literal sense; a note that this refers to a specific wrathful emanation may be useful for listeners unfamiliar with the tradition.

The mantra strings are transliterated from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit; they are kept in their original form as liturgical formulae are conventionally not translated.

The text appears to be from a ritual manual belonging to the Vajrapāṇi-abhiṣeka cycle, and the hundred-and-eight-name praise section transitions here into a longer hymn whose continuation is implied but not yet complete.  The colophon identifies two phases of translation activity. The first translator, the "Chak translator" (Chag lo tsā ba), is the well-known twelfth-to-thirteenth-century Tibetan master Chag Lotsāwa Chöje Pel. The Indian paṇḍitas named in the colophon, Devendra Deva and Maṇikaśrījñāna, are his collaborators. The second colophon verse records a later re-translation or revision by someone relying on the instructions of Kunga Nyingpo and Jikmé Jungné Bèpa in India and Nepal; the identity of this later translator is not named explicitly beyond "I."

The epithet Hāla hāla rendered in the body is left as a transliterated exclamatory or fierce-name epithet, as it functions as a proper name-mantra within the sequence and has no standard English rendering.

The phrase rendered "destroyer of the bright light of ferocity" involves some interpretive latitude; the Tibetan "གཏུམ་པའི་རབ་སྣང་འཇོམས་པ་པོ" could also mean "destroyer of the supreme ferocity of fierce ones," but the reading adopted follows the most natural syntactic flow.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
