The Great King of Tantras Called the Net of Magical Illusion (Māyājālamahātantrarāja)

The Net of Magical Illusion, known in Sanskrit as the Māyājālamahātantrarāja and in Tibetan as Gyutrul Drawa (rGyud kyi rgyal po chen po sgyu 'phrul dra ba), is a major Mahāyoga tantra belonging to the Nyingma class of the Vajrayāna tradition. It takes the form of a discourse delivered by the Blessed One in a transcendent jeweled palace and centers on the elaborate maṇḍala of Vairocana and the emanational display of the Tathāgatas, unfolding teachings on the nature of magical illusion as a key to understanding reality and enlightened activity. As a "great king of tantras," it holds a position of particular doctrinal importance within the tantric literature associated with the Mahāyoga vehicle. This text is Toh 466 in the Kangyur, classified among the tantric scriptures of the collection.

In the language of India: Māyājālamahātantrarāja nāma. In the language of Tibet: The Great King of Tantras called the Net of Magical Illusion.

Homage to the glorious Vajrasattva.

Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in a great palace of precious jewels, multi-storied, arranged upon the pure ground — adorned with vajra pillars, exceedingly beautiful, resplendent with the arrangement of precious gems, with vajra bells ringing, adorned with magnificent offerings born from the mind, arrayed with vajra wheels, and filled with the purposeful activity performed by those bearing the various emanation forms of the Tathāgatas. Activity having been set in motion arising from the very heart of Vairocana, through the gateway of the four faces there appeared many and various presences: vajras, great precious jewels, Amitābha, the assembly of great bodhisattvas, and the goddess-queens of the knowledge-mantras. He was encircled by an retinue of many wrathful kings, male servants, female servants, male messengers, female messengers, male attendants, and female attendants, all facing forward toward him. Suffused with the bliss of the primordial wisdom of meditative absorption, undeparted from that state, gratified by great compassion, he strove earnestly to liberate all sentient beings. Amid the multitude of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, great serpents, humans, and non-humans — there was seated the Blessed One, the great Vairocana, the Vajra Tathāgata.

Then at that moment, the Blessed One gazed upon Vajrapāṇi, the great bodhisattva, who was seated in the midst of the courtyard of the assembly, and smiled. The instant he smiled, Vajrapāṇi, the great bodhisattva, draped his upper robe over one shoulder, looked up with an expression of respectful attentiveness, took his vajra in hand, pressed the right knee to the ground, joined his palms together, paid homage to the Blessed One, and spoke:

"Blessed Ones who are buddhas do not smile without intention. For what reason, O Blessed One, has your gaze fallen thus and a smile arisen? This has caused us — myself and the retinue — to be filled with wonder. For this reason, may the Blessed One speak with the great roar of a lion."

Then, the very moment that Vajrapāṇi, the great bodhisattva, had thus made his request, the Blessed One, entering into meditative absorption upon the samādhi called the Net of Magical Illusion — the Great King of Tantras, the spreading forth of primordial wisdom — the ultimate means beyond all tantras, the later and the most final, for attaining the bliss of vajra-wisdom, the method of pleasing through creative display, the source of all suchness, the method of complete victory through the posture and stance, liberation through the vajra of great bliss through wisdom and method, joyfully spreading through playful display and the spreading of the vajra — having thus entered that state, spoke:

"I shall now expound the sacred pledges of the tantra of the Net of Magical Illusion, the maṇḍala, the forms of the drawn images, the meditation, the recitation of mantras, the postures and stances, the arrangement of the ritual application, meditative absorption, the descent, the dispersal, the scattering, the drawing in, the binding, the striking, the menacing gesture, the act of humbling, the cutting, the burning, the filling, the creation, the empowerment, the giving, the taking of master and student, and the many modes of engaging with the secret mantras."

"Therefore you too should enter the supreme meditative absorption and listen." Then all those Tathāgatas, all those bodhisattvas, and all others gathered in the retinue began to attend to the discourse on the Dharma-connection.

Now, first and foremost, since attainment (siddhi) follows in the wake of the master, if one is without a master, attainment will not be obtained. Therefore the characteristics of the master shall be explained.

O Vajra of Wisdom-Essence, listen!

Steady and tamed, possessed of discernment,
Patient, upright, free of guile and deception,
Skilled in the practice of the secret-mantra tantra,
One should perform the work of drawing the maṇḍala.

Fully knowing that very suchness in its ten aspects,
Granting fearlessness to every sentient being,
Ever joyfully devoted to the Great Vehicle —
Such a one is declared to be a master.

Fully versed in the treatises of outsiders,
Walking the path of the śrāvakas,
Gathering that very secret,
Yet not knowing the Great Vehicle —
Having no compassion,
Lacking faith and diligence,
Ever conducting oneself badly,
And disparaging the treatises —
One who is not endowed with the characteristics taught above
is not to be regarded as a master.

One who is endowed with those characteristics is to be held as a master. By such a one the maṇḍala is to be drawn, by such a one alone the tantras are to be taught, and concerning the secret mantras taught by such a one it is certain they will be accomplished — of this there is no doubt.

Delighting in virtue and in vows,
Ever reverencing the lama,
Continually making offering to the gods —
One possessed of such qualities is a student.

As for what kind of person the master is to be regarded: the lama is equal to all the buddhas; he is perpetually the Vajradhara himself, the Tathāgata, Jewel-Crown; he is the great ocean of wisdom, like a wish-fulfilling gem and precious jewel. Therefore grasp the master's qualities — never his faults.

By grasping his qualities one gains attainment; by dwelling on his faults one's attainment diminishes. Even his shadow should not be trodden upon — it is taught to be like demolishing a stūpa. One will be caused to abandon whatever is sacred among movable and immovable secrets. Those who disparage the master should not be seen even in a dream. One who disparages the master is seized by obstructors and evil misleaders; one who commits such vile and terrible deeds should always be abandoned by the wise. It is explicitly taught that one who disparages the master will come to dwell in the hell called Avīci, of utter and extreme anguish.

Therefore let everyone exert themselves with utmost effort, and let sentient beings possessed of faith offer worship to the master who ripens immeasurable fruit and who is the cause of desiring the fruit of buddhahood.

This is the first chapter of the great king of tantras, the Net of Magical Illusion, the chapter on the graduated entry.

Then the Blessed One, the great Tathāgata of the vajra of Vairocana, gazed upon the maṇḍala of the fully assembled retinue and entered into the meditative absorption called "Vajra of Supreme Secret Blessing, Outpouring of the Wisdom of the Great Net of Magical Illusion." Having thus entered that absorption, he declared to Vajradhara:

"Vajrapāṇi, if one confers empowerment in this maṇḍala — the great king of the tantra Net of Magical Illusion, the great king of maṇḍalas, the innermost essence beyond all other maṇḍalas, the Blazing Essence of Great Wisdom, known as 'Vajra Veneration' — one will have conferred empowerment in all maṇḍalas. Therefore, Vajrapāṇi, those sentient beings in whom one sees the colored pigments of karma, they too, having paid homage to all Tathāgatas,

will have made offerings — know that those who have thus properly entered are counted among the buddhas in the buddha-fields of the Tathāgatas. From the very outset they are to be fully received.

The master sits in the divine posture. With the right hand drawn in taut, he brandishes the vajra, and with the left hand he rings the bell, circumambulating in the vajra-step. Adorned with all ornaments and filled with wrathful pride, he recites the syllable HŪṂ; and encircled by the resplendent majesty of the maṇḍala, he meditates in the form of a wrathful deity. He then loudly proclaims these words to the hostile gods, asuras, and the holders of secrets assembled there:

"I, the master, named such-and-such, in order to bring a certain great disciple to the fulfillment of perfect awakening, and in order that all sentient beings may attain the unsurpassed primordial wisdom, shall here in this place draw the maṇḍala-king named such-and-such. Let all of you who are assembled here — gods and asuras, yakṣas and rākṣasas, hungry ghosts and flesh-eaters, the forgetfulness-causing spirits, elementals, ḍākinīs, oppressive spirits, garuḍas, kinnara, vidyādhara adepts, old men and old women together with their servants and retinues — depart! Hearing the command of Vajradhara, depart at once! Those who do not depart: Vajrapāṇi — whose face blazes with extreme fury, whose name is HŪṂ — with the blazing, all-consuming wisdom-vajra shall split their heads into a hundred pieces." Having said this three times, while remaining in that same posture, he consecrates the ground so that it becomes of the intrinsic nature of the vajra.

Then, with the right leg extended, and the left leg extended, the posture of sitting on a bench, the rounded sitting posture, the harmonious foot-stance, the tortoise foot-stance, the vajra-pedestal, the manner of the vajra-clasp, the one-legged stance, the lion posture, the lion's couching posture, the bee-in-flight posture, the vajra-chain, the vajra-brandishing, the vajra-stance, the vajra-hooking, the vajra-dance, the vajra-terrifying posture, the vajra-zombie posture, the vajra-hammer, the vajra-consecration, the vajra-bracelet, the magical-illusion posture of a woman, the vajra-net, the lifting of the great powerful one, the vajra-fang, the vajra-laughter, the vajra-sound, the sword method, the vajra method, the wheel method, the pestle method, the banner method, the lasso method, the lotus method, the spear method, the fearlessness method, the iron-hook method, the fruit method, the short-spear method, the bow method, the arrow-holding method, the arrow-shooting method, the whirling javelin method, the method of supreme bestowal, the lance method, the single-pointed weapon method, the prostration method, the vajra sitting posture, the meditative absorption sitting posture, the vajra cross-legged posture, the lotus sitting posture, the hero's cross-legged posture, the hero's stance, the excellent posture, the squatting posture, the playful posture, the bowing forward, the leaning back, the boundless posture, the victorious posture, the thunder-cloud posture, the broad-bellied posture, the binding posture in which one dwells pierced by the victor's peg, the pegging posture, the net, the encircling fence, and the binding of the directions —

One should meditate on the ground as blazing with the intrinsic nature of the vajra, luminous and compacted, and settle it definitively. Then, stating one's own name, one should recite the syllable Hūṃ — for when the sound of that secret mantra is uttered, one becomes supreme above all maṇḍalas.

Next, one should invoke the goddess of the earth as a witness, reciting three times:

Goddess, you are witness
to the conduct, the distinctions,
the grounds, and the perfections
of all the protecting buddhas.
In order to obtain all attainments,
I shall inquire concerning the maṇḍala.

Then one should invoke all buddhas and bodhisattvas as witnesses, reciting:

Buddhas, who dwell in loving concern,
turn your intention toward me.
Come together with your heirs
and take full possession of this ground.

Next, at the center of the maṇḍala one should make a Dharma maṇḍala, and all around its borders, stating the mark, one should make dots. Having thus invited and delighted the guests with offerings, one departs and offers the directional torma cakes.

Then one should invoke the sentient beings as witnesses. Having cleansed the crown of the head with scented water, one spreads the hands upon the heart and makes a fist with five tips, binds the protection cord with the right hand, and from the palm offers the wooden rod and kuśa grass.

Then, being seated, one should go for refuge to the Three, confess all wrongdoing, rejoice in merit, offer oneself, and arouse the awakening mind. The going for refuge is as follows, recited three times:

I go for refuge to the Three Jewels.
I confess all wrongdoing.
I rejoice in the virtue of beings.
I hold in mind the awakening of a buddha.

Then one should teach whatever Dharma one can and whatever is desired. Thereafter, as explained before, since the guests will be pleased, one performs a beautiful offering ceremony, and once again requests them to depart.

Then one enters inside and, on the ground of the maṇḍala, lies on the right side and examines whether the dreams are auspicious or inauspicious. The following day one draws the maṇḍala.

From colors and lines, manifest
the essences of the five buddhas.
This is pure dharmadhātu,
the liberation of sentient beings.

The abode of all Tathāgatas,
Vairocana, sovereign of victors —
free of every fault,
begin the auspicious painting.

First the master himself shall do it, then the students throughout. The first night is the taking possession of the ground, the second the preparation and abiding, the third the entering. With a cord of five-colored thread one should draw the sacred maṇḍala, measuring either a thousand cubits or five hundred, or else five cubits, two-and-a-half cubits, or down to one cubit.

It is square with four gates, adorned with four stairways (toraṇas). In the center one draws a fine wheel. At the center one places Vairocana. In the eastern direction, Akṣobhya; in the southern direction, Ratnasambhava; in the western direction, Amitābha; in the northern direction, Amoghasiddhi. In the corners of the wheel, draw four goddesses who bestow attainments. In the direction of the lord of empowerment, Locanā; in the direction of fire, Māmakī; in the direction free of deception, the White-Robed One; in the direction of wind, the goddess Tārā.

Proceeding outward by the force of the vajra, in the second ring: in the east, Vajrasattva-mā; in the south, Vajraratna-mā; in the west, Vajradharma-mā; in the north, Vajrakarma-mā. In the corners: the Impeller, the Precious Liberatrix, the Frowning One, and Vajrachain.

Then, rising up gracefully,

Proceeding outward by the force of the vajra, in the third ring: in the eastern direction, draw the bodhisattvas Maitreya, Mañjuśrī, the Elephant of Incense, and Jñānaketu. In the southern direction, draw Surakṣita, Sāgaramati, Akṣayamati, and Pratibhānakūṭa. In the western direction, draw Mahāvikrāmin, the Abandoner of All Lower Realms, the Intelligence that Decisively Destroys All the Darkness of Sorrow, and Jalinīprabha. In the northern direction, draw Candraprabha, Amitābha, Ākāśagarbha, and Sarvanīvaraṇaviṣkambhin.

At the eastern gate: Yamāntaka. At the southern gate: Prajñāntaka. At the western gate: Padmāntaka. At the northern gate: Vighnāntaka. In the cardinal positions: Acala, Takkirāja, Nīladaṇḍa, and Mahābala. In the corners, draw vajras. Draw vajras also on the inner side of the gates. The first wheel is drawn with white pigment. The second is drawn with three pigments: white, yellow, and blue. The third is to be drawn with five colors. Such, then, is the great maṇḍala.

Next, for the purpose of conferring empowerment, make a second maṇḍala that is square and has four gates. In the center, draw a lotus with eight petals and a heart. On the second cloth, in the east place a vajra, in the south a jewel, in the west a lotus, and in the north a sword. Thus is the maṇḍala to be drawn.

Then the master shall thoroughly wash his body, anoint it with incense, bind upon his head a well-strung flower garland, and bind his neck with silk. Now the ritual vases are to be praised:

The vase whose neck is bound with flowers,
filled with the five precious medicinal substances
and with perfumed water —
let this vase be praised aloud.

The four victorious vases belonging to the mistresses who are sovereigns of the maṇḍala, the four vases of all the gods, and the vases in the directions of the gates — let these all be recited over by the one who performs all the rites. All sentient beings are to be purified with the fumigation offering. Alternatively, this may be done with bundles of kuśa grass.

Then, having praised the vases aloud, present the divine food-offering and the ritual cake, and offer flowers, incense, fragrance, garlands, the water offering, the foot-washing water, and so forth. Having presented these, place the vases in the corners. The victorious vase is to be invited into the center.

The Tathāgata and the other deities of the maṇḍala are to be invited, made vivid, introduced, sealed, and brought under control. Having bound all directions with kīla-pegs, fence, and net, and having established the boundaries, dedicate and offer again the water offering, the mouth-refreshing water, the seat, flowers, and incense; then display to each deity its own mudrā in turn.

Offer also praises, vajra songs, the sound of ringing bells, cymbals, flutes, and the variety of stringed instruments. The other varieties of music are also to be offered in praise. Having praised, beg their forbearance and make supplication for the attainment of all siddhis.

Then the master himself enters, and after him introduces the student. Then, for all sentient beings, protect and perform the rite with this heart-essence and the mudrā at the five places, performing the rite at the five places:

Hūṃ oṃ jina-jik,
āḥ ārolik,
hūṃ vajra-dhṛk,
svā ratna-dhṛk,
hā prajñā-dhṛk.

Then introduce with this verse:

Into this palace, this maṇḍala heart,
of all the Tathāgatas —
the one who brings attainment of vajra-wisdom —
I now introduce my student.

Then, with the mind of Vajrasattva, scatter flowers: Pratīccha vajra hoḥ!

With this verse the face covering is removed:

Today, by the force of faith,
behold the maṇḍala here before you.
You are born into the family of the buddha-lineage,
blessed by mantra and mudrā.
All siddhis are brought to perfection,
and the supreme samaya is accomplished.
The supreme sport of vajra and lotus —
know this to be the very nature of mantra.
This is its heart-essence:
Paśya vajra!

Whichever deity's flower falls upon — that is that one's deity.

Then the empowerment is to be conferred. Adorned with perfumes, flower garlands, robes, and ornaments, with a crown placed on top, and covered with parasols, victory banners, pennants, divine and brahmic threads, anklets, girdles, and auspicious implements — thus the master confers empowerment upon the student who has been purified of misdeeds.

First with the victorious vase, then with the four goddesses, and then with the fourth of all the deities, with auspicious verses and melodious song, and with the ringing of the vajra-bell — all the protectors, directly and visibly present, hold the vase filled as full as a sesame pod, and with it confer the empowerment upon that very one. One should understand this to be the maṇḍala itself.

Having thus contemplated it, the defining marks of the Dharma are to be demonstrated: with a nail, a mirror, a wheel, a conch, a vajra, a book, pure gold, silver, and the like — ignorance, clouded vision, and so forth are to be cleared away to whatever extent is possible. Even if a nail and the rest are not available, the forms are to be shown by mudrā.

Then the samaya is to be taught:

From today forward, you, my son,
even should it cost you your life or your body,
must never hold the sacred Dharma,
the awakening mind, or the master in contempt.
Honor your vajra-siblings,
show loving-kindness toward those who hate,
and be free of attachment —
such is the conduct never to be abandoned.
If you act contrary to this,
the buddhas will cast you into hell.

Then the master is to accept the offering. Land, a beautiful young wife, precious gold and blazing jewels, pearls, coral, and the like — and even one's own body — are to be offered. The devoted student should do precisely this for the master. The master is to be pleased. Pleasing the master is the siddhi itself — not otherwise — so the Sage has declared.

Then the student is raised up, and in the presence of all the buddhas an offering is to be made, and the fire-offering rite is to be performed. Then, having performed the rite according to the observed ritual: through fire-offering, recitation, and making offerings, and likewise through the stages of meditation, by means of the stages of pacification and enrichment, all rites are to be brought to full completion.

Then all the Victors of the three times are requested to depart. The coloring powders are carefully gathered up, cast into a great river, and the site smeared with cow-dung. All the implements of the maṇḍala are to be collected by the master himself. The student must not use even the slightest portion — to do so would be a breach of samaya. The master may use whatever is appropriate, as he himself wishes.

This is the second chapter, the chapter on the stages of the maṇḍala, from the great King of Tantras, the Māyājāla.

Then the Blessed One, Vairocana the Tathāgata, entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra That Enters the Wheel of the Secret Mantra." Having entered that absorption, he declared to Vajrapāṇi:

Vajrapāṇi, hear these syllables, the heart-essence of secret mantra.

Vajrapāṇi requested: Blessed One, for the benefit of all sentient beings, may the Blessed One explain. May the Sugata explain.

Oṃ — this is Vairocana.
Oṃ Hūṃ — this is Akṣobhya.
Oṃ Trāṃ — this is Ratnasambhava.
Oṃ Hrīḥ — this is Amitābha.
Oṃ Khaṃ — this is Amoghasiddhi.

Oṃ Ga — Gaṇalocani Hūṃ — this is Locana.
Oṃ Kiri Kiri Māmakī Hūṃ — this is Māmakī.
Oṃ Kaṭe Vikaṭe Kaṭaṃ Kaṭe Karoṭi Pāryasvāhā — this is the White-Robed One.
Oṃ Tāre Tuttāre Ture Svāhā — this is Tārā.
Oṃ Sattva Vajrī Hūṃ — this is Vajrasattvā.
Oṃ Ratna Vajrī Hūṃ — this is Vajraratnā.
Oṃ Dharma Vajrī Hūṃ — this is Vajradharmā.
Oṃ Karma Vajrī Hūṃ — this is Vajrakarmā.
Oṃ Cale Cule Cunde Svāhā — this is the Rousing One.
Oṃ Ratna Loki Ratnājvālinī Svāhā — this is Ratnādīpā, the Jewel-Lamp.
Oṃ Bhṛkuṭi Bhṛ — this is Bhṛkuṭī, the Frowning One.
Oṃ Vajra Śṛṃkhale Hūṃ Phaṭ Svāhā — this is Vajraśṛṃkhalā, the Vajra Chain.
Oṃ Ma — this is Maitreya.
Oṃ Muṃ — this is Mañjuśrī.
Oṃ Samanta Bhadra Hūṃ — this is Samantabhadra.
Oṃ Gandha Hatini Hūṃ — this is the Perfume Elephant.
Oṃ Jñāna Ketu Vati Hūṃ — this is Jñānaketu, the Wisdom Banner.
Oṃ Bhadra Bhati Bhadra Pāle Hūṃ — this is Bhadrapāla, the Noble Guardian.
Oṃ Sāgare Mahāsāgare Hūṃ — this is Sāgaramati, the Ocean of Wisdom.
Oṃ Akṣāye Hūṃ Hūṃ Akṣa Yakṣa Akarma Āparaṇa Pariśodhani Svāhā — this is Akṣayamati, Inexhaustible Wisdom.
Oṃ Pratibhāni Pratibhāne Kūṭe Hūṃ — this is Pratibhānakūṭa, the Heap of Splendor.
Oṃ Sthāme Mahāsthāmavati Svāhā — this is Mahāsthāmaprāpta, the Attainment of Great Power.
Oṃ Sarva Apāya Jate Sarvāpāpaṃ Śodha Hūṃ — this is the one who dispels all lower rebirths.
Oṃ Sarva Śoka Tamo Nirgāmati Hūṃ — this is the wisdom that utterly destroys the darkness of all sorrow.
Oṃ Jālini Mahājālini Hūṃ — this is Jālinīprabha, the Radiance of Nets.
Oṃ Sudhana Śriye Hūṃ — this is Sudhana, the Excellent Wealth.
Oṃ Candre Candre Vyāvalokite Svāhā — this is Candraprabha, the Moonlight.
Oṃ Amite Prabhe Amite Hūṃ — this is Amitābha.
Oṃ Ga Ga Ga Ne Gagana Vara Locana Hūṃ — this is Ākāśagarbha, the Treasury of Space.
Oṃ Sarva Nipāraṇa Viṣkabhine Hūṃ — this is the one who utterly removes all obscurations.
Oṃ Yamāntakṛt — this is Yamāntaka, the Destroyer of Death.
Oṃ Prajñāntakṛt — this is the Invincible One.
Oṃ Padmāntakṛt — this is Hayagrīva.
Oṃ Amṛta Kuṇḍali Vighāntakṛt — this is Amṛtakuṇḍali, the destroyer of obstacles.
Oṃ Acala Hūṃ Haṃ — this is Acala, the Immovable.
Oṃ Ṭakki Hūṃ — this is the King of Desire.
Oṃ Nīla Daṇḍa Mahāḍaṇḍa Hūṃ — this is the Blue Staff.
Oṃ Krodha Hūṃ Jaḥ — this is the Greatly Wrathful.

These are the mantra syllables to be set in the maṇḍala. In reliance upon these, through the distinction of meditative absorption, the Blessed One declared many tens of millions of mantras from which definite liberation arises. All the Tathāgatas and the rest are invited by means of the hook mudrā. The bodhisattvas are sealed by the vajra mudrā. The vidyā goddesses are sealed by the mudrā of the mothers of their respective families. The wrathful ones are sealed by the face mudrā. The attendants are sealed by the lasso mudrā. The messengers are sealed by the hook mudrā. All of these and so forth constitute the practice of invitation.

This is the third chapter, the chapter on the sequential explanation of secret mantra, from the great King of Tantras, the Māyājāla.

Then the Blessed One, the great Vairocana the Vajra Tathāgata, entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Magical Emanation Through the Power of Great Wisdom," and declared to Vajrapāṇi:

Vajrapāṇi, hear this — the supreme secret, unsurpassed meditative absorption of all the assemblies of secret mantra — that which, when mantra-holders attend to it for the purpose of accomplishing images on cloth or on plaster and so forth, brings their wisdom to completion, and through that completion of wisdom they may with ease attain buddhahood itself; as for other attainments, there is no need even to mention them.

Accomplished through the wisdom of Oṃ —

Vairocana, the great king,
wisdom and gnosis fully expanded,
worshipped as supreme by all the buddhas,
wearing the crown with topknot, peaceful in aspect,
adorned with three faces,
golden in color, with six hands —
the first bearing the mudrā of meditative concentration,
holding a rosary, adorned with an arrow,
the left hand grasping the breast of a goddess,
holding a wheel and a bow.
Gods tremble and realms overflow;
amidst a halo of blazing light,
clouds of all the buddhas stream forth,
issuing out and embracing perfectly.
Meditate upon one whose domain is that very suchness,
and perform the inner recitation of the secret mantra.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Wisdom That Brings to Completion the Power of All Meditative Absorptions."

Through the path of the syllable Oṃ,
contemplate the great light of the lord of the world,
the god wearing the crown with topknot,
his diadem adorned with omniscience,
ornamented with all adornments,
his form like the moon in its glory,
blazing with three faces and three eyes,
with six hands and fourfold posture,
two hands in the lotus-holding gesture,
the right holding a rosary and a vajra,
the left grasping the breast,
on the third hand pouring three pills from above,
causing all forms to radiate out,
encircled on all sides with streams of rays of light,
gazing upon the obstacles that collapse and are thrown into confusion
when weapons fly from his hands.

Meditating upon the path through such words as these,
buddhahood is attained without long delay.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Dharma King, Supreme and Vast in All Aspects, Source of All."

On the moon-disc, upon the syllable Hūṃ,
meditate upon the vajra of mind,
of color like fine indigo,
lavishly covered with all adornments,
Akṣobhya residing in the crown,
completely adorned with precious jewels,
with three faces and three eyes,
slightly smiling, graceful in bearing,
ornamented with eight hands —
the first shaking a vajra,
the second raising a sword,
the third holding a fine iron hook,
and the fourth also shaking an arrow.
Likewise the left hand holding a bell,
the second grasping the breast,
the third a lasso,
and the fourth holding a divine bow.
Seated at ease in a posture of play,
blazing likewise in a cloud of buddhas.

Whoever meditates continuously on one like this,
their vajra mind becomes firm,
and without long delay they attain awakening,
passing beyond aging and death.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra Force, King of All Meditative Absorptions, That Perfects the Immeasurable Power of Sentient Beings."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Trāṃ,
the very essence of the arising of jewels,
with three faces and three eyes,
adorned with a crown and topknot,
of the red color of great bliss,
seated in the meditative absorption mudrā,
in the bodhisattva cross-legged posture —
the right hand holding a vajra,
the left entirely holding a jewel.
From rays of golden light radiating outward,
as a great cloud of the arising of jewels,
or as other bodhisattvas
cause to expand through a rain of jewels.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Wisdom Vajra of Directly Attaining Jewels."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Khaṃ,
contemplate the vajra of meaningful fulfillment,
well-seated in the meditative absorption mudrā,
blazing like the light of emerald,
the right hand holding a sword,
the left an iron hook.
The cloud of buddhas streams forth,
and is gathered in again to accomplish perfectly.
Blazing with great rays of light,
like the radiance of an ocean of wisdom.

Whoever continually cultivates the mind in this way
becomes the mighty sage Ākāśagarbha.
Abandoning all conditioning factors,
they become equal to space itself.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Wisdom Vajra That Illuminates Space."

Accomplished from the wisdom of La,
adorned by all the Victors,
the goddess has three eyes and eight hands,
her three faces the color of gold.
Beautifully attired in graceful dress,
she is the Lady of Desire, smiling slightly.
The first pair of hands bestows the supreme gift,
the second likewise bestows fearlessness.
In the third right hand is a vajra,
and in the fourth she levels an arrow.
The left hands bear the threatening gesture with a lasso,
in the second a jeweled sheaf of grain,
in the third a rosary,
and the fourth is beautifully adorned with a bow.
Wreathed in rays of red light,
the gods are overcome with awe and rapture,
and press their palms together in reverence.
From the cloud of buddhas streaming forth,
the Wisdom Vajra Eye Goddess (Skt. Prajñācakṣus) is inconceivable.
Adorned with the fruits and branches of awakening,
meditate on a goddess such as this.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra Method of Illumination by the Eye of Wisdom."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Ma,
Māmakī, she who is of the vajra lineage,
the goddess has three faces and six hands.
Her expression is laughing, yet tinged with wrath.
Her complexion resembles the hue of a blue lotus,
blazing intensely with red light.
The first right hand bestows fearlessness,
the second holds a vajra firmly clasped,
the third levels an arrow.
The left hands bear the threatening gesture of the pointing finger,
the second holds a lasso beautifully,
and the third grips a bow.
The Vajra Lady bears the three bodies,
characterized by an essentially immaterial nature.
The cloud of buddhas streams forth.
Meditate in this way, cultivating such a form.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Profound Wisdom Vajra Arising through the Power of Magical Emanation."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Pa,
a Mother whose complexion resembles the moon,
her name is known as Śvetavāsinī — the White-Robed One.
Adorned fully with three eyes,
her third face is joyful.
Six hands: the first bestows fearlessness and the gaze of compassion,
in the second is a vajra,
the third is adorned with an arrow.
The left hand holds a lotus,
in the second a rosary of precious jewels,
and the third bears a bow.
She is beautifully seated in a posture of ease and play,
causing the forms of the buddhas to stream forth.
Meditate upon her expanding like a cloud of lotuses.
If one desires the supreme awakening,
meditate upon the Jewel Body.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Wisdom Vajra That Draws Forth the Victor of the Lotus Form."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Tā,
the goddess Tārā, endowed with miraculous power,
abides in graceful and charming attire.
With three faces and three eyes,
six hands, seated in the bodhisattva posture,
she smiles with the radiance of emerald light.
The first right hand bestows fearlessness,
in the second she holds a vajra,
and in the third she levels an arrow.
The left hands bear the threatening gesture of the pointing finger,
in the second is a blue lotus (utpala),
and the third grips a bow.
Blazing with red rays of light,
expanding through the streaming forth of buddhas,
she who brings joy — the mother of all sentient beings —
cultivate her continually without interruption.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Wisdom Vajra That Brings All Sentient Beings Under Sway and Fills Them with Joy."

The names of the four female mind-consorts proclaimed by the supreme being, the Victor, are these:
Mind Consort, Jewel Lady,
Dharma Lady, and Vajra Action Lady.
Through their play they bring delight and satisfaction.
Meditate upon each of them appropriately.
By meditating upon them,
without long delay one attains awakening.

This is the meditative absorption of the four noble females who bring supreme joy to sentient beings.

Accomplished from the syllable Tsuṃ,
the form of the goddess called the Arouser (Skt. Codanī).
Seventy million Victors of the three bodies
praise her with the song of secret mantra.
The ninth syllable holds nine methods,
and is also the abode of nine deities.
Her three faces are the color of autumn lotuses,
adorned with every ornament.

Young, in the bloom of youth, a liberator of all vidyā mantras.
Her first face smiles just slightly,
adorned with three eyes.
Her right face is turned upward in an open expression,
radiant with the petals of a blue lotus,
her fangs like the crescent of a new moon,
her tongue made thick as lightning.
Her left face is red in color,
crushing all arguments with her sharp teeth.
She sits beautifully in the posture of ease.
Her twenty-six hands are adorned with bracelets of various kinds.
Two of those hands, the root hands, bear the root mudrā and adorn the region of the heart.
The two right hands grant fearlessness.
The third holds a sword.
The fourth grants a jewel.
The fifth holds the fruit called bījapūra.
The sixth draws an arrow.
The seventh holds a noose for enemies.
The eighth holds a staff.
The ninth holds a hammer.
The tenth holds an iron hook.
The eleventh holds a vajra.
The twelfth holds a garland of skulls.
The thirteenth holds a rosary of beads.
The second left hand holds the victory banner of the wish-fulfilling jewel.
The third holds a lotus.
The fourth holds a round vase for pouring over the head.
The fifth holds a lasso.
The sixth holds a bow.
The seventh holds a short lance.
The eighth holds a wheel.
The ninth holds a conch shell.
The tenth bears the threatening finger.
The eleventh holds a fine vase.
The twelfth holds a javelin.
The thirteenth holds the Perfection of Wisdom.

Meditate upon her seated on a lotus at the center of a maṇḍala of red rays of light,
wearing over the upper body an upper garment of thin multicolored silk,
adorned on the head with a tiara of many colors.
Various magical displays appear,
and the buddha bodies radiate forth.
The thirty gods, together with transgressors and obstructors, being utterly terrified,
join their palms together in reverence.
Whoever continually meditates upon such a form,
then exerts themselves and recites the secret mantra
and thereby swiftly attains buddhahood —
what need is there even to speak of other siddhis?
One will attain the very essence of meditative absorption
and be fully liberated from all misdeeds.

This is the meditative absorption called Glorious Victor through the Power of Rousing the Wisdom of Boundless Victors.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Ra,
the form called Jewel Lamp.
Three faces, three eyes,
six hands of golden color.
The measure of one young and in the bloom of youth,
the face smiling just slightly.
The hands are filled with jeweled bracelets.
Two hands join in a jeweled gesture of homage,
churning forth a garland of maṇḍalas of light.
The right hand grants fearlessness,
and the third nocks an arrow.
The left bears the threatening finger toward those who are hostile,
and the third hand also holds a bow.
Red rays of light blaze forth brilliantly.
The foot of skillful means presses down in the posture of ease.
She sends forth and gathers in clouds of buddhas,
a delightful upholder of the Dharma.
Meditate upon such a goddess.

This is the meditative absorption called Illuminating with the Wisdom of the Jewel Cloud of Buddhas.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Bhrī,
the wrathful-browed liberator from all fears.
Three faces, three eyes,
like the light of an autumn moon.
Six hands, seated upon a lotus,
intent upon the posture of play.
The face smiles with a wrathful expression,
gazing toward a brilliantly blazing summit.
The right hand holds a vajra,
the second is said to hold a sword.
The third nocks an arrow.
The left bears the threatening finger,
the second carries a round vase for pouring,
and the third holds the weapon of a bow.
She sends forth clouds of buddhas
and likewise gathers up others excellently.
Whether lying down, standing, or sitting,
always meditate upon such a goddess.

This is the meditative absorption called Wisdom Vajra that Renders All Fears Without Support.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Hūṃ,

Its name is Vajra Chain,
the one who produces the binding of all things,
destroying unruly sentient beings.
Three-faced, three-eyed,
six-armed, blue-green in color, of beautiful form,
she smiles a little.
The right hand holds a vajra;
the second holds a vajra chain;
the third nocks an arrow as well.
The left bears the threatening finger;
the second is said to hold a noose;
the third strives to hold a bow.
She sends forth clouds of buddhas.
When one meditates upon the Vajra Chain,
awakening is attained in an instant —
what need is there to speak of other accomplishments?

This is the meditative absorption called Wisdom Vajra of Vajra Fetters, the View.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Māṃ,

the supreme being born of the Sage's power, Maitreya (Loving-Kindness),
three-faced, three-eyed,
with a lotus beneath him,
seated in the bodhisattva's cross-legged posture,
adorned with four hands.
Two hands bear the gesture of teaching the Dharma.
The second right hand
performs the supreme act of protecting sentient beings.
The left holds the divine substance: the flower of the nāga tree
with a cluster of blossoms at its head.
He sends forth great clouds of buddhas and bodhisattvas just so.

This is the meditative absorption called Wisdom Vajra Adorned with the Power of Loving-Kindness.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Muṃ,

the youthful one, gentle of speech, path of words,
who has attained the supreme of wisdom and gnosis,
teacher of the profound way —
Mañjuśrī — three-faced, three-eyed, with three top-knots,
adorned with the ornaments of youth,
wearing a fine crown, unperturbed,
covered with various flowers.
Below, upon a great lotus,
he sits in the bodhisattva's cross-legged posture,
playing with grace and skillful means,
his face smiling a little.
The great hero, six-armed:
the first hand bestows fearlessness;
the second holds a sword;
the third nocks an arrow.
Likewise, the left holds wisdom;
the second holds a blue lotus;
the third is a bow.
He is covered with the highest wisdom and gnosis,
carrying the nature of buddhas as a cloud.
Meditate upon him, yearning to send forth buddhas.

This is the meditative absorption called Wisdom Vajra of the Supreme Wisdom and Gnosis of Mañjuśrī, the Illuminator.

Fragrant Elephant, Wisdom Pinnacle,
likewise Surakṣita (the Well-Guarded),
Ocean of Intelligence, Intelligence itself,
Inexhaustible, and Eloquence Amassed —
he who has attained the great power of abandoning all lower rebirths,
the intelligence that dispels all darkness of sorrow,
Suvarṇa (the Good Treasure), Net of Light,
likewise Moonlight and Amitābha,
Ākāśagarbha (Treasury of Space) and Remover of All Obscurations —
all those protector bodhisattvas, thus and so on, in incalculable number,
arise from the seed syllables,
endowed with the union of syllable and mudrā,
three-faced, three-eyed,
playing through various means.
The source of these bodhisattvas:
meditate by reciting the secret mantra.
Those who are colorful, who gather and send forth —
the yogin should always contemplate them.

Accomplished from the wisdom of the syllable Hūṃ,

the glorious one, Mañjuśrī,
famed as the Foe of the Lord of Death (Yamāntaka),
blazing like the fire at the end of an age,
yet resembling the light of a rain cloud —
six-faced and six-armed,
likewise six-footed, like a short man in stature,
of exceedingly great girth,
he is supremely fierce.
His tongue is curled, his teeth are vajra-like,
adorned with ornaments of snakes,
wearing a skirt of tiger-skin,
bearing the stance of sport, he rides a great buffalo.
Below him a lotus is made.
He wears a garland of human skulls, his hair coiled,
frowning, yellowish, emitting a great roar.
Above his head, the Unperturbed One (Akṣobhya) —

he abides in perfect glory within the three bodies,
adorned completely by the splendor of Mañjuśrī.
The first face laughs openly;
the right face has the tongue curled;
the left face presses the lip with the teeth in a wrathful expression.
The right hand holds a sword;
the second holds a vajra;
the third brandishes an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening gesture with a lasso;
the second grasps a breast;
the third holds a bow drawn taut —
adorned most excellently.
A goddess embraces him from the right;
her second hand holds a blue lotus (utpala);
the left, bright as the moon,
is to hold a white lotus.
Beneath him, gods and hosts of obstructing spirits (bgegs) scatter in terror and prostrate.
With blazing red rays of light,
clouds of buddhas radiate forth and are gathered in.

When yogins have meditated on this and, with focused concentration, recite the secret mantra,
whether sitting, lying, or walking,
having contemplated it well and consumed everything,
even though they enjoy the five objects of desire,
they will not be stained, like the sky.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra-Wisdom that Bewilders all Slayers — the Entering of the Discipline of the Yamāntaka."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Pra,
the wrathful one whom no other can withstand,
three-faced and three-eyed,
adorned with six arms,
golden in color, of middling stature,
with a maṇḍala of red rays of light,
seated on a lotus in the stance of sport,
adorned with ornaments of snakes —
the first face laughs openly,
likewise the right face is turned aside,
and the left presses the lip with the teeth.
Blazing in various ways,
the right hand holds a vajra;
the second holds a staff;
the third holds an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening gesture with a lasso;
the second grasps a breast;
the third, it is said, holds a bow.
Above his head, the Unperturbed One (Akṣobhya),
in sequence radiating and gathering —
one should meditate, growing familiar with exactly this.
By repeating it, buddhahood itself is attained.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra-Wisdom that no other can withstand."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Ha,
the wrathful one who brings the lotus to its end,
three-faced and three-eyed,
red in color, with eight hands,
the body wrapped in snakes,
seated on a lotus in the stance of play,
gazing with a wrathful look —
the first face laughs openly;
the right face has the tongue curled;
the left presses the lip with the teeth.
Wearing a tiger-skin, wrathful,
the right hand holds a vajra;
the second, it is said, holds a club;
the third holds an iron hook;
the fourth brandishes an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening finger gesture;
the second grasps a breast;
the third holds a lotus;
the fourth holds a bow.
His crown bears the Unperturbed One.
Having meditated on the many buddha-forms radiating and gathering,
accomplishment comes — and not otherwise.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra-Wisdom of the Supreme Steed."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Hūṃ,
named the Wrathful Destroyer of Obstructing Spirits,
he abides in the midst of fire and bestows accomplishments,
a follower of Vajrapāṇi.
Three-faced and three-eyed,
six-handed, a destroyer of all obstructing spirits —
the first face laughs;
likewise the right face is raised upward;
the left face presses the lip with the teeth in wrath.
The color of the petals of a blue lotus,
with his feet he treads upon obstructing spirits;
the second stands upon a lotus.
The right hand holds a sword;
the second, it is said, holds a dagger for enemies;
the third brandishes an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening gesture with a lasso;
likewise the second grasps a breast;
the third, it is said, holds a bow.
The clouds of buddha-nature radiating forth —
a wise one skilled in gnosis should meditate on this.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra-Gnosis that Vanquishes All Obstructing Spirits and is Victorious throughout."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Hūṃ,
possessing the form of the Unmoving Child —

three faces, three eyes,
adorned with the ornaments of youth.
The first face is laughing;
the right face is raised upward,
its tongue moist with blood, rolling;
the left face wrathfully presses down with its teeth.
The Hūṃ syllable fills the region of the heart.
Dark indigo in color,
it dwells upon a lotus atop a jeweled mountain,
seated in the posture of royal ease.
The mighty one who vanquishes the water-holders of obstructing spirits,
ablaze with six arms radiating forth —
in a maṇḍala of flaming red light:
the right hand holds a sword;
the second, it is said, holds a vajra;
the third brandishes an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening gesture with a lasso;
the second grasps a breast;
the third holds a bow, drawn taut.
Grasped by Brahmā and gazed upon,
it bears a crown and head-ornament
bound with various flowers,
the left side-lock dark as a bee in color,
adorned throughout with the Unmoving One.
Clouds of buddha-nature radiate
many great miraculous displays.
Whatever yogin always meditates
in this way through meditation —
that one will ascend the stairway
to unsurpassed awakening.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Gnosis of the Unmoving One who Acts in Accordance with the Command of all Tathāgatas."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Hūṃ,
the name is the King of Desire —
three-faced, three-eyed,
proclaimed to have six arms.
Crowned with a tiara adorned
by a buddha crown-jewel,
the first face is laughing,
turned to the right;
the left face wrathfully presses its teeth down.
The brow bears successive wrathful frowns.
Blazing, the color of a rain-cloud,
in a flaming red maṇḍala.
The two hands bear the mudrā of desire;
the right, it is said, holds a vajra;
the third sports with an arrow.
The left hand grasps a breast;
the third hand also takes up a bow.
Seated upon a lotus in the posture of royal ease,
below, he also crushes the obstructing spirits.
He who causes the light of awakening to blaze forth —
if one meditates in meditative absorption,
one attains unsurpassed gnosis.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Victorious Vajra of Gnosis that Draws All Hearts."

Accomplished from the wisdom of Hūṃ,
the wrathful one bearing a blue lance,
three-faced, three-eyed,
adorned throughout with six arms.
The first face is coquettishly laughing;
likewise the right face is raised upward;
the left face presses down with its teeth.
The body is like flowing water in color;
the form is adorned throughout with serpents.
The locks of hair coil in flowing ringlets;
upon the crown-ornament dwells a buddha.
Seated upon a lotus in the posture of royal ease,
the right hand holds a vajra;
the second holds a lance itself;
the third bears a weapon, an arrow.
The left hand bears the threatening gesture with a lasso;
the second grasps a breast;
the third takes up a bow.
In a flaming red maṇḍala,
clouds of awakening produced by the gnosis of union
radiate forth without cease.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Victorious Vajra of Gnosis that Penetrates the Thoughts of Obstructing Spirits."

The wrathful one declared by the syllable Hūṃ,
of supreme gnosis, greatly powerful,
three-faced, three-eyed,
adorned throughout with eight arms —
the color of a cloud,
adorned throughout with serpent ornaments;
red eyes, blazing hair thrust upward,
upon the crown dwells the Unmoving One.
The first face is fully laughing;
likewise the right is fully raised upward;
the left presses down with its teeth.
Seated upon a lotus, graceful and composed,
in the fierce proud striding posture,
he destroys the gods of the ten directions.

Dwelling within the solar maṇḍala, surrounded by blazing flames.
In the right hands: the first holds a vajra,
the second is marked as bearing a spear,
the third brandishes a sword on high,
the fourth is adorned with an arrow.
The left hands: the first bears a noose with the threatening finger pointed,
the second grasps a breast,
the third holds a hammer,
and the fourth left hand bears a bow.
Radiating the nature of the buddhas in clouds of light,
he is to be meditated upon with the highest contemplation.

This is the meditative absorption called "Victorious through the Power of the Gnosis Vajra Free from Confusion."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Bhruṃ —
the wheel-turning sovereign of the uṣṇīṣa,
possessing the three bodies, three-faced,
of golden color, with beautiful radiance,
adorned throughout with a fathom's reach of light,
abiding in the mudrā of meditative absorption,
seated in vajra posture upon a lotus
atop a jeweled mountain.
The four mothers of the family,
beautiful in body and in every limb,
their faces adorned in charming, graceful manner,
clothed and covered with garments and ornaments,
exerting joyful effort born of longing,
bearing mudrās, precious sheaves of grain,
vajras, lotuses, and utpalas,
each goddess dwelling in her own quarter.
The uṣṇīṣa bearer of five rays of light —
throughout, a garland of wheels encircles him,
and between the wheels the vajra abides,
adorned with a garland of rays of light.
Radiating the nature of the buddhas in clouds,
he fills all of space entirely.
Those who seek the essence of awakening
should meditate upon such a wheel-bearing one;
applying themselves and cultivating this yoga,
they will without long delay obtain what they desire.

This is the meditative absorption called "Gnosis Vajra, the Adornment of All Awakening Essences."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Jaṃ —
a yakṣa possessing the nature of harm and dwelling, with three bodies,
three-faced, with two hands,
bearing the vījapūraka citrus fruit.
Seated upon a lotus throne,
or abiding in the graceful seated posture.
On every surface adorned with all ornaments,
four yakṣa women
cause a rain of jewels to fall.
Above their heads dwell the five buddhas,
and from that excellent crown
further ornaments cluster at the left peak.
Radiating the clouds of the buddhas,
they cause a rain of jewels to descend.
Whoever desires wealth and riches
and meditates upon such a dwelling of harm —
that one's great earth will swiftly,
without long delay, be filled with wealth and riches.
Vajrapāṇi (the Holder of the Vajra) shall always
present the water of ambrosia as an offering.

This is the meditative absorption called "Gnosis Vajra of the Precious Cloud that Bestows the Rain of Giving."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Māṃ —
radiating like the rays of the sun,
dwelling in a chariot drawn by seven horses,
illumining the blazing maṇḍala,
three-faced, with three eyes,
the six hands appearing in yellow color,
striving to guard the ten directions,
the face smiling in a charming, graceful manner,
wearing ornaments of youth that sway and shimmer,
the crown adorned with the five perfect buddhas,
decorated with topknots and flowers.
The right hands: the first holds a vajra,
the second bears a needle and thread,
the third draws an arrow taut.
The left hands: the first bears a noose with the threatening finger,
the second an aśoka branch,
the third a bow itself.
Radiating many reflected forms,
he binds hostile sentient beings
and makes their eyes and mouths contract.
Those who exert themselves reciting secret mantras,
if they desire the supreme awakening,
should meditate upon the goddess who makes the syllable Hūṃ.
One who meditates upon this
thoroughly brings sentient beings under control
and renders those who are hostile powerless.

This is the meditative absorption called "Supreme Excellent Vajra that Renders the Hostile Powerless."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Paṃ —
the forest hermitage of knowledge, bearing leaves,
three-faced, with three eyes,
the faces smiling yet wrathful —

Adorned with all ornaments,
youthful, young, with six arms —
in the right hands, a vajra,
the second holds a sword,
the third, an arrow, finely nocked.
The left holds a lasso with pointing finger,
the second, a bundle of leaves,
the third hand holds a bow.
Adorned at the crown with a garland of flowers,
above which five colors intermingle,
and a buddha abides therein fully blended.
Seated golden on a lotus throne,
the great red maṇḍala blazing fiercely,
gathering and releasing clouds of wrath —
whatever spirits dwell within living beings
are burned away by the fire of wrath,
and having burned them, a rain of the buddha's
colored nectar is caused to fall.
When a yogin meditates in this way,
all malevolent beings are pacified,
and all illnesses are stilled.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Blazing Vajra of Gnosis that Pacifies All Illness."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Jaḥ —
the knowledge-mantra's name is "Poison-Dispeller,"
bearing a crest of seven serpent heads,
adorned with blazing jewels,
three-faced, with three eyes,
youthful, blazing in appearance,
smiling yet wrathful,
adorned with serpent girdles,
with six arms in a posture of sport,
and above the crown Akṣobhya abides.
In the right hands, a vajra,
the second strives holding a sword,
the third, in the manner of a dancing posture,
finely nocks an arrow in the stance of sport.
The left holds a lasso with pointing finger,
the second bears a flower of poison,
the third hand holds a bow.
Adorned at the crown with flowers,
seated golden on a lotus throne,
with an aura of crimson radiance,
encircled by streaming jaḥ syllables,
enveloped all about by blazing flames,
emanating reflected forms of buddhas.
With auspicious vase-like hands resembling the moon,
whose openings are splendidly adorned with jaḥ syllables,
she pours forth upon those afflicted by poison.
Ever as the three-bodied Poison-Dispeller,
meditate upon her for those struck by poison.
By meditating in this way,
one swiftly, without long delay, attains awakening,
and the poison of the afflictions is dispelled.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Sovereign of Crests, the Vajra Mudrā of Gnosis."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Tri —
the great body is Hālāhala.
Three-faced, with three eyes,
adorned with crests and crowns,
the god who bears a crescent moon,
the crown adorned with skulls,
enthroned in the form of a king with crests,
adorned with all ornaments,
appearing like a white lotus,
powerful in mind, with a gracious bearing,
eight-armed, with a smiling countenance,
the lower garment is a tiger skin.
In the right hands, a vajra,
the second holds a rosary of counted treasures,
the third finely nocks an arrow.
The left is adorned with a lotus,
the second holds a breast,
the third holds a bow.
The right fourth holds a triple-pointed spear
wreathed entirely in a serpent.
In the left, a skull-cup filled
with fragrant flowers of many kinds.
Seated on a red lotus,
abiding in the manner of a posture of sport,
the bodhisattva of yoga should meditate
upon him dwelling within a cave of precious gems.
The nature of a buddha, together with form,
and the arising of all manner of great magical displays —
through non-conceptual meditative absorption,
all foods are consumed,
and inner mantra-holders recite the mantras.
Meditating in sequence through yoga,
one will swiftly attain awakening
and be led to unsurpassed bliss.
All wishes are perfectly fulfilled
and Hālāhala is thoroughly propitiated.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Gnosis, Thoroughly Propitiating Hālāhala."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Sa —
the goddess who shatters the great thousands and utterly destroys all illness,
who vanquishes hostile sentient beings,
bearing a thousand arms and a thousand heads,
adorned throughout with three eyes,
greatly energetic, eight-armed, wrathful —

Seated in a posture of authority, intent with concentrated thought,
her right hands bearing sword, iron hook, and arrow — the offerings and divine substances —
her left hands bearing lotus, vajra, jewel,
lasso, bow, and axe.
Her complexion is red; her four faces
destroy a thousand obstructing spirits.
Striving in one's own yoga,
she reaches to the limits of the sky, moving and spreading forth.
Bearing a garland, she devours elephants, horses, and men.
Urged by her activity,
the mantra hero shall recite.
The lord of yoga who desires accomplishment —
by performing this rite, protection is assured.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Supreme Vajra of Gnosis, Victorious over the Great Thousands, Protecting Every View of the Great Army, the Supremely Powerful One Who Utterly Destroys All."

Accomplished from the syllable Dhvaṃ —
bearing the mudrā of the threatening finger,
the great fierce one with four faces,
adorned throughout with three eyes and eight arms,
holding sword, pestle, wheel, arrow,
triple-pointed spear, vajra, and bow,
her finger raised in the threatening gesture —
when vajra-zombies and the like appear,
the mere sight of her shatters and scatters armies.
If one meditates always on this goddess,
without long delay, awakening is attained.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Gnosis, Victorious, the Supreme Summit of the Skillful One Who Utterly Destroys the Three Worlds."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Pra —
the great powerfully mighty one who subdues adversaries,
with three eyes and eight arms; on the right,
adorned with sword, wheel, and triple-pointed spear,
and arrow; on the left,
holding vajra, lasso, enemy-axe, and bow —
she causes hateful obstructing spirits to fall.
At the ten sites of the secret maṇḍala,
those called "child-killers" and "womb-devourers"
hold the vase of all the gods.
The teacher confers empowerment,
and in her womb one should visualize
a child of gentle form entering.
Through the mudrā of the lasso,
from a bad natal destiny a human form arises,
and even one who has lost mindfulness —
the womb is expanded by merit.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Gnosis, Victorious, the Individually Perceiving One Who Views All Wombs."

Produced through the playful gnosis of the syllable Ba —
the goddess called Excellent Wealth-Intellect,
with great splendor, golden in hue,
six-armed, in the full bloom of youth,
adorned with all ornaments,
graceful, charming, and blazing with skillful means.
Her first right hand grants supreme boons;
the second holds a sheaf of grain;
the third holds an arrow ready.
Her left hands hold a wish-fulfilling jewel,
a bow that rains down precious things.
Surrounded by friendly beings,
taking the form of a commissioned yakṣiṇī,
she is to be contemplated as raining down a shower of precious things
and likewise a rain of all wealth.
This great one of excellent wealth-intellect —
if a mantra practitioner thus meditates upon her,
she causes a rain of wealth to pervade
the expanse of seven leagues.
Supreme holy giver of awakening,
one should meditate thus, identifying oneself as the yoga-form.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Gnosis, Abundantly Raining Down a Continuous Stream of Wealth."

Accomplished from the gnosis of the syllable Bi —
a demoness blazing, garlanded with lightning,
named the One Born of Silver-White,
greatly powerful, subduing adversaries,
pendulous-bellied, with gnashing fangs,
golden matted hair tossed upward,
adorned with a topknot crown.
On her crown abides the Unshakeable One.
With twelve heads and eighteen arms,
three eyes on each, bearing skull garlands,
the fierce one holds in her hand
a skull-cup filled with blood.
Her lower garment is wrapped in a lion's hide;
she bears serpents as an offering.
She holds sword, iron hook, wheel,
pestle, trident, and bell,

banner-staff, cudgel, and the supreme lance she bestows,
bow and arrow, short spear, and mace;
lasso, enemy's skull-staff, and hammer she holds.
With these ornaments her body is adorned.
Dark in color, in a playful posture,
she abides upon a lotus seat, subduing adversaries —
she who is spoken of as "the Tamer."
Always sounding HŪṂ, performing the HŪṂ action,
meditate on her as fully endowed with mantra recitation.
For the benefit of all sentient beings, one who has gathered the accumulations
will swiftly, without delay, attain awakening.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Supreme Power of Conquering at the Very Heart of Awakening, She Who Binds All Sentient Beings."

The form to be meditated upon by means of the syllable KṢIṂ
is adorned with all manner of ornaments —
young, youthful, of lovely bearing,
her hair half-bound upon her head in a topknot.
Likewise her upper garment
is wrapped in white silk gauze,
and upon it she is adorned
with magical flowers of five colors.
Golden in complexion, smiling,
she plays with a sidelong glance.
She is beautifully seated upon a jeweled mountain
adorned with wish-fulfilling trees.
The mild wrathful one, the Vajra,
abides having pressed upon her head.
The yakṣiṇī of the very last cord of rope —
meditate on her as filling all of space.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Supreme of All Accomplishments of All Yakṣiṇīs."

As for the mantra, OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ —
the three syllables are the form of the three-eyed one;
Viṣṇu and the Great God (Śiva) are the ancestors.
Three-faced, bearing their own weapons,
prompted by the vajra-HŪṂ-maker,
and having meditated on the vajra meditative absorption,
one will obtain attainment in an instant.

This is the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of the Three-Eyed One's Playful Accomplishment of All the World."

Furthermore, whatever seed syllables of secret mantra letters
are used to compose a combination,
if one meditates on those vajra syllables,
they are accomplished even without strenuous effort.
Aphrāmā, born from the action of Aphrāmā the Seizer,
along with her five hundred sons,
Pañcaratna and Śrīmatī —
these will be swiftly accomplished.

This is the fourth chapter of the Tantra of the King of Tantras, the Net of Magical Manifestation, the chapter on the successive unfolding of meditative absorptions.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered the meditative absorption called "The Supreme Vajra of Peaceful Vision Free from Dust upon All Tathāgatas," and from the Mother of all Tathāgatas he brought forth the gnosis of manifold wisdom. This was drawn forth from the vajra of the three pledges.

OṂ BHAGAVATĪ RURU SPHURU JVALA TIṢṬHA SIDDHA LOCANĪ SARVA ARTHASĀDHANI SVĀHĀ.

Then, by the mere utterance of this which perfects all actions completely:

All the buddhas and the learned bodhisattvas rejoiced;
the hosts of Māra trembled;
the vajra-recollection of the buddhas was invoked.
The peaceful Mother of the Buddhas,
when aroused by the vajra pledge,
bestows life upon the dead
and grants accomplishment to the unaccomplished.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered the meditative absorption called "The Supreme Pledge Vajra, the Blazing Vajra of the Three Bodies," and drew forth this — the Mother who gives birth to the supreme vajra-holder, she who fully accomplishes all attainments of all vajra maṇḍalas.

OṂ ŚAṂKARE ŚĀNTIKARI GHUṬṬA GHUṬṬA GHUṬṬINI BHĀṬAYA GHUṬṬI SVĀHĀ.

Then, by the mere utterance of this,
all those born from the three vajras
opened their eyes
and recalled the power of the vajra.
She who protects all accomplishments
likewise accomplishes all activities.
She who vanquishes all evil —
she it is who enacts peace, increase, and flourishing.

Then the Blessed One Vairocana, with great attachment fixing himself in the lotus-dance posture, entered into the meditative absorption called "The Pledge Vajra, Scattered by the Three Vajras of the Mind," and drew forth from the three vajras this supreme Mother who holds all phenomena.

OṂ KAṬE BIKAṬE NI KAṬE. KAṬAṂ KAṬE SVĀHĀ.

Then, by the mere utterance of this supreme Dharma victory banner,
those in meditative absorption opened their eyes
and recalled the vajra-lotus.
She who is the Mother of great increase,
she who causes the treasury of Dharma to flourish —
if one meditates upon her, relies upon her, and recites her,
she will guard one extensively.

Then the Blessed One, having realized the full control of all things within himself, entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra that Delights through the Equality of the Three Vajras," and proclaimed this Tārā — the liberating Mother who holds all varieties of gnosis.

OṂ TĀRE TUTTĀRE TURE SVĀHĀ.

Then, by the mere utterance of this,
all the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs
half-opened their eyes, gazing brilliantly,
and recalled their gnosis-vajra nature.
When this goddess recites but once,
all beings will be brought under her sway.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra that Enters the Supreme Gnosis of All Tathāgatas," and drew forth this from the three vajras.

Homage to all the buddhas everywhere. OṂ KHA KHA KHĀHI KHĀHI. Tamer of all wicked beings, holding in your hands a sword, a mace, and a noose, four-faced, four-armed, with a khaṭvāṅga — come, come! You who seize the vital breath of all wicked ones, great destroyer of obstacles, of terrifying form, dreadful to all beings, roaring with great laughter, robed in the hide of a tiger — act, act, for all karmas! Sever, sever all mantras! Burst, burst the supreme mudrās! Draw, draw all beings! Churn, churn! Grind, grind! Drive all the wicked ones within, drive them within the center of the maṇḍala, causing the cessation of life! Act, act for my aims! Burn, burn! Cook, cook! Do not be confused! Do not be confused! Remember the pledge! HŪṂ HŪṂ! PHAṬ PHAṬ! Blast, blast! Destroy all enemies! Do, do! Accomplishing all hopes and wishes — hail O Blessed One! I ask for a little: accomplish all my purposes! SVĀHĀ.

Then, upon the utterance of this wrathful one,
all buddhas and skilled bodhisattvas
trembled and were struck with awe,
and turned toward the chief lord, Vajra Vairocana.
He is a vajra lattice and net,
endowed with all the varieties of gnosis.
With the fine old skull — of one or two stirrings —
in the earth-ritual of the foot-mark,
combined with the practice of the fourth goddess,
and blessed by the five buddhas,
meditating on the three bodies as inseparable,
one swiftly, up to the throat,
should press with the foot and recite the mantra.

Thus declared the great Blessed One Vajra Vairocana.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called "The Sky Vajra, the Great Indestructible Supreme Cloud of the Gnosis Vajra," and proclaimed this essence drawn from the three vajras.

Homage to all the buddhas everywhere. Homage to Vajra Wrath, the great ferocious Bhairava with enormous fangs, holding in his hands a sword, a mace, and an axe. OṂ AMṚTAKUṆḌALI — KHA KHA KHĀHI KHĀHI! TIṢṬHA TIṢṬHA! BANDHA BANDHA! HANA HANA! DAHA DAHA! GARJJA GARJJA! Blast, blast all obstacles! Great lord of gaṇas, Mahāgaṇapati, you who bring cessation of life — SVĀHĀ.

When the great wrathful one thus spoke,
all the greatly renowned buddhas
leapt up in their minds and were struck with terror.
The misleaders and the obstructers trembled.

Calling to mind Vairocana, who holds supreme sovereignty over the wisdom of the three bodies,
one presses the vajra wheel of wrath
against the footprint left upon the earth by him,
and against the leaves stirred by the wind.
The lord of assemblies takes his place at the foot of that one,
and having been roused by HŪṂ and PHAṬ,
the rite of expulsion is performed.
Even the vajra-bearing buddhas are driven away.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, entered into meditative absorption called "Vajra Wisdom Radiating Vajras," and from the three bodies drew forth this great wrathful one called Vajra.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA KĀYA VĀK CITTAVAJRĀṆĀṂ. OṂ HŪṂ JINARITI TIṢṬHA HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ PHAṬ SVĀHĀ.

Then, as this wrathful one was proclaimed,
the buddhas and bodhisattvas
were struck with fear and seized with terror.
They called to mind the chief, Vairocana.

For rākṣasas, spirits, ḍākinīs,
and the draining demons and possessing spirits —
for the pressing of these with the vajra-press,
even HŪṂ alone accomplishes the work.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Vajra Boundless, entered into meditative absorption called "The Vajra That Gathers Together Immeasurable Precious Qualities," and from the three bodies drew forth this great wrathful one, Vajra Lotus.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. OṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ TARULA BIRULA SARVA VIṢAGHĀTAKA JVALITA VISPHULIṄGA AṬṬAHĀSA NĀDENI KEŚARISAṬĀTOPATAṂKĀRA VAJRAKHURA NIRGHĀTANA CALETA VASUDHATALANIŚVĀSAMĀRUTOTIKṢAPTADHĀRAṆĪDHARA BHĪṢAṆAAṬṬAHĀSA APĀRIMITA BALAPARĀKRAMA ĀRYAGAṆABHĪTABHŪTAGAṆA THYUṢITA BUDHYA BUDHYA HAYAGRĪVA KHĀDA KHĀDA PARAMANTRANĀṂ CHINDHA CHINDHA BHINDHA BHINDHA SIDDHIMME ADHIṢṬHATE ĀVIṢAYA ĀVEŚAYA VAJRA SARVA JVARAPIŚĀCĀNI SARVAGRAHEṢU APRATIHATOBHAVA VAJRADAṂṢṬRĀKIÑCIRĀYASI IDAṂ DUṢṬAGRĀHĀṆA DUṢṬA SARVĀṂBĀ DHUNA DHUNA MATHA MATHA MARDA MARDA PĀṬAYA PĀṬAYA MAṬA MAṬA BANDHA BANDHA BUDDHADHARMASAṂBHĀ ANUJÑĀTAṂ KARMA KURU ŚĪGHRAṂ HAYAŚRĪ HAYAGRĪPĀYA PHAṬ. VAJRAYA PHAṬ. VAJRĀGĀTRĀYA PHAṬ. VAJRANETRĀYA PHAṬ. VAJRADAṂṢṬRĀYA PHAṬ. VAJRAKHURĀYA PHAṬ. VAJRAKHURANIRGĀTANĀYA PHAṬ. PARAMANTRAVINĀŚANĀYA PHAṬ. SARVATRAI LOKYABHAYAṂKARĀYA PHAṬ. SARVAKARMASU PRATIHĀṬAYA PHAṬ. VAJRAKULASANTRĀSANĀYA PHAṬ. HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ SVĀHĀ.

Then, when that great wrathful one arose —
those born from the supreme Vajra Lotus —
their minds were seized with fear and terror.
Together with their retinues, shaken by dread,
they called to mind the assembly of awakening
and turned their thoughts to vajra wisdom.
In their hands, a lotus and the syllable HA —
contemplate these as supremely blazing.
The king of wrath abiding in meditative absorption,
holding the three vajra syllables,
pervades even the purified three realms.
The unbearable poison must be drawn forth directly.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Amoghasiddhi, entered into meditative absorption called "The Jewel Vajra of the Victory Banner, Supreme, Whose Purpose Truly Arises," and from the three vajras drew forth this great king of wrath, the one bearing a blue trident.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. EHI EHI BHAGAVĀN NĪLAVAJRADAṆḌA TURU TURU HULU HULU SVĀHĀ. GULU GULU GULĀPAYA GULĀPAYA KRAMA KRAMA BHAGAVĀN VĀYUVEGENA BHŪTĀNĀṂ ŚĪGHRAṂ DAHA DAHA DARA DARA VAHA VAHA PACA PACA MATHA MATHA PĀTAYA PĀTAYA MAṬA MAṬA MOṬĀPAYA MOṬĀPAYA SARVAKARMAṆI —

TSINDHA TSINDHA. BHĀKṢAYA BHAKṢAYA. ASTHI MIDAṂ ASE. RUDHIRA MAJJHA MIDAṂ. VIŚVA MAJJHA. RUDIRA. BRIYA EHYEHA BHAGAVĀN. SARVA VIGHNAN. SARVA VIDYĀNI. SARVA MANTRĀṆI. SARVA MŪLA KARMAṆI. KṚTRIMĀṆI. VIṢA DĪNI. SARVA GRAHĀNA. HANA HANA. BHAÑJA BHAÑJA. MARDA MARDA. EDAṂ ME. KĀRYAṂ SĀDHAYA. HŪṂ NĪLĀYA NĪLĀYA. NĪLA VAJRA DAṆḌĀYA. TURU TURU. VIGHNĀN VINĀYAKĀNA. NĀŚAYA NĀŚAYA. HURU HURU. DĪPTA CAṆḌĀYA. SARVA ŚATŪṂ NṚṂ HṚDAYĀNI PĪṬAYA. TSINDA TSINDA. PARA VIDYĀNĀM. CCHEDAKA HŪṂ VIDYĀNĀM ŚĪRṢṬAKA. SAMAYA MANUSMARA. VAJRA DHARA VACANAṂ CA. MĀRMĀṆI NIKṚNTA. HŪṂ HANA HANA. DAHA DAHA. PACA PACA. KURU KURU. TURU TURU. HURU HURU. PHAṬ PHAṬ HŪṂ HŪṂ KṚTĀNTRAYA. DEVA ṚṢI VIDRĀVAKĀYA. HANA VAJRA DAṆḌENA SVĀHĀ.

The moment this supreme great wrathful one had spoken, all the ranks of the māras trembled, and the buddha-fields shook violently, and the chief sovereign of the three bodies, Vairocana, was called to mind. By merely reciting this mantra one hundred and eight times when the combined assembly of all the buddhas is urged to action, the great wrathful one strikes down at once.

Then the Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata Akṣobhya, entered into meditative absorption called "The Vajra That Radiates Everywhere in All Its Arrangements," and from the three bodies drew forth this mighty vajra.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. OṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ. PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ. UGRA ŚŪLA PĀṆI HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ. OṂ JYOTINI RANĀDA HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ. OṂ MAHĀ BALĀYA SVĀHĀ.

Then the wrathful one having spoken,
all those encircled by the noose
were filled with utter terror in their minds.
They recalled the Vajra Vairocana.
By recitation of this king of secret mantras
every activity is perfectly accomplished.
When the rain is heavy it cuts it off,
when it is light it brings it down fully.

Then the Blessed One entered into meditative absorption called "Vajra Essence of All-Blazing," and from the vajra three bodies drew forth this great wrathful one who is the wrathful one of desire.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. ṬAKKI HŪṂ JAḤ.

Then by the speaking of that wrathful one,
all the buddhas trembled exceedingly,
the bodhisattvas too were struck with fear,
and the armies of the māras fell.
By the activity of the right foot, with a manifold vajra,
pressing down upon the marks beneath,
endowed with the wisdom-power of the three bodies,
frowning wrathfully, frown upon frown,
summoned by all the secret mantras,
all sentient beings are brought under mastery.

Then the Blessed One, the great Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered into meditative absorption called "Vajra Blazing Utterly, Wisdom of Wrath Blazing Utterly," and from the vajra three bodies drew forth this vajra-wrathful one, Acala, the fierce and immovable.

NAMAḤ SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. ACALA KĀṆA CAṆḌA. NAṬA NAṬA. MAṬṬHA MAṬṬHA. MOṬṬHA MOṬṬHA. SAṬṬHA SAṬṬHA. TAṬṬHA TAṬṬHA. TANA TANA. DAHA DAHA. MOHA MOHA. MOHA KARA. HASA HASA. VAJRA HĀSA KURU. HĀSA HĀSA. MARA MARAṬ. MARA MARAṬ. GARJJA GARJJA. HANA HANA. BANDHA BANDHA. TIṢṬHA TIṢṬHA. ĀVIŚA ĀVIŚA. MAHĀ MANTĀ PĀLAKĀ. DHUNA DHUNA. TIṆI TIṆI. KHĀDA KHĀDA. VIGHNA NA. MĀRAYA MĀRAYA. DUṢṬĀNA. BHAKṢA BHAKṢA. SARVĀN KURU KURU. KIRI KIRI. MAHĀ VIṢAMA VAJRA. SPHOṬAYA SPHOṬAYA. HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ. TRI VILĀTA RAṄGA NARTAKA. AṂ AṂ AṂ. HĀṂ HĀṂ HĀṂ. ACALA CAṬA. SPHOṬAYA SPHOṬAYA. HŪṂ HŪṂ ASAMANTA KĀṬĀṬA MAHĀ BALA ŚATĀYA. VARA MANDĪNA. AṂ AṂ. HĀṂ HĀṂ MAṂ ŚUDDHYANTU LOKA. TUṢYAṂ TU VAJRĀṂ. NAMO TU KṚU APRATIHATĀ BALEBHYAḤ JVĀLĀYA. TRĀṬA ASAHA NAMAḤ SVĀHĀ.

Then the wrathful one, the Immovable, the greatly powerful wrathful one, spoke these words:

All the gods and nāgas are summoned and sent forth.
The yakṣas, rākṣasas, and asuras,
overcome with terror, fall into a swoon.
The hosts of māras, having collapsed,
tremble and utterly shrink in fear,
remembering the chief, Vajra Vairocana.
Pressed in by the many kings of the wrathful ones,
threatened by terror,
the chief, Vairocana himself,
swiftly accomplishes the various karmic works.

Then the great Blessed One, the Tathāgata Mahāvairocana of the vajra, entered into meditative absorption in a samādhi called the Great Terrifying Vajra, through the blazing light-rays of the vajra-wisdom of the three bodies, and then the great vidyā-king (mantric sovereign) Sundarakāya spoke these words:

NAMAḤ OṂ SUMBHA NI SUMBHA HŪṂ. GṚHṆA GṚHṆA HŪṂ. GṚHṆA PĀYA GṚHṆA PĀYA HŪṂ. OṂ ĀNAYA HO BHAGAVAN VIDYĀ JA HŪṂ PHAṬ.

Then, upon the speaking of these wrathful words:

All the daughters of the gods
had their hair disheveled and were left naked.
Their eyes rolling and trembling,
the chief, Vajra Vairocana,
sovereign of the supreme vajra of the three bodies,
pressed their two breasts with his feet.
He will be remembered as the one who vanquishes with wisdom.
Torn apart by the iron hook,
bound by the vajra-lasso,
all the daughters are to be summoned —
he is supreme in the summoning of daughters.

Then the Blessed One, by fully extending great wisdom, entered into meditative absorption in a samādhi called Displaying Joy, and recalled the awakening of the buddhas, enacting the arising of Vajradhara, the supreme of the three bodies.

Dwelling magnificently in the great wheel,
the clouds of the buddhas,
and likewise the clouds of Vajradhara,
pour forth the vajra iron hook and lasso.
The chief born from omniscient wisdom —
if one meditates on oneself as the sacred mantra being,
even the buddhas are summoned;
what need then is there to speak of Vajradhara and the rest?
The female deities, daughters of the Great God (Śiva),
placing their feet upon the wind,
drawn to the heart by the iron hook,
all sentient beings too shall be summoned —
in this there is not the slightest doubt.
Vajra Vairocana
has a great body the color of the moon,
dwelling within the moon maṇḍala.
Contemplating the descent of vajra-nectar (amṛta),
by reciting it ten times,
one will inevitably draw them in.
Arising from the vajra maṇḍala,
through the blazing light-rays
of the great vajra iron hook,
young maidens are certainly summoned.
The wrathful one who stirs the three vajras
dwells beneath the vajra earth.
He burns all the asuras,
and through the passionate attachment of the asura maidens,
knocking them down with a torch,
he draws them with the vajra hook and lasso,
summoning the asura daughters.
When one has obtained the lance, skull-cup, and wheel,
and is fully endowed with hair-rope,
and when the eclipsing planet (Rāhu) has seized the moment — placing it in the mouth,
the king of substances accomplishes it through the vajra iron hook.
The fierce one, together with the wind deity and Viṣṇu,
the goddess, the yakṣa and the yakṣinī,
those who are sent with their full retinue — stricken with fear and terror —
by inscribing their names, one summons them continuously at all times.
The buddhas dwell beautifully in the wheel.
Meditate clearly upon Mañjuśrī as vajra.
The great wrathful one, Yamāntaka,
holds in his hand the vajra iron hook.
Blazing in fury, with radiating flames,
he summons and controls the yakṣa daughters.
Through the practice of mudrā and mantra,
and through the practice of dhyāna and maṇḍala,
the words of summoning are spoken —
if performed otherwise, accomplishment will not arise.
By dwelling always before the feet of the king,
Vajrasattva, the great bodhisattva,
perfects the minds of all,
and urges them again and again.

Then the Blessed One Vairocana the Great entered into meditative absorption called the Wisdom-Vajra of Victorious Gnosis of the Vajra Tathāgata, and drew forth this vajra of transformation, the Great Vajra Queen, from the three vajra bodies.

Oṃ śūlinī svāhā.

Then, as soon as these words were spoken:

The renowned and mighty nāga queens,
unclothed and just as commanded,
recall the lord Vajra Vairocana.
By this mantra, this knowledge-mantra,
all nāgas are summoned.
By the power of vajra concentration
and by the recitation of the secret mantra,
by adorning them with ring ornaments,
the wide-eyed nāga queens are drawn in,
and those nāga queens bound by desire
through the five qualities of sensual pleasure
are brought into service.

Then the Blessed One entered into meditative absorption called the Samaya of the Surge of the Great Ocean of Force of Vast Space, and proclaimed this great knowledge-mantra dhāraṇī of the Great Propelling Mother:

Namaḥ samantabuddhānāṃ samyaksaṃbuddhākoṭīnāṃ. Tadyathā: Oṃ cale cule cuṇḍa svāhā.

Then, as soon as this great knowledge-mantra was proclaimed:

The buddha-fields all trembled greatly.
The bodies of the bodhisattvas
were roused from their meditative absorption.
The māras fell stunned and swooning,
all of them crying out in lamentation.
The daughters of the earth below,
the asura daughters, and the nāga queens,
and the daughters of the hidden lords — all were stirred,
and they recalled the lord, Vajra Vairocana.
By the recitation and
the application of meditation upon this knowledge-mantra,
through recitation alone accomplishment arises,
and having summoned them, one fully enjoys their company.

Then the Blessed One entered into meditative absorption called the Vajra of Victorious Space-Treasury, and drew forth this wrathful frown-vajra of the samaya of Dharma-nectar from the three vajra bodies.

Oṃ bhayanāśani trāsani trāse, trāsaya trāsaya, vairaṭi bhṛkuṭi tiṭe, vaiṭaṭi vaiṭaṭi, śvete śvete, jaṭini svāhā.

Then, as soon as these words were spoken:

The mantra-holders and the gods
were all shaken and seized with fear.
The māras, terrified and thrown into turmoil,
recalled with one-pointed mind
the lord, Vajra Vairocana.
By the shaking of the jewel earrings,
the female mantra-holders and nāga queens,
the secret daughters of the asuras —
all are summoned and brought into service.
By this, all activities are performed,
and the ḍākinīs are struck with fear.

Alternatively, for all these secret mantras,
in a forest empty of people,
the mantrin having recited ten million times,
is said to accomplish all activities.

Whoever denigrates the master,
whoever disparages the Great Vehicle,
whoever mocks the person who is joined to the pure streams of secret mantra practice —
that one will not attain accomplishment.
Such a person is perpetually seized by spirits.
After compelling them, one should keep this secret,
or else one's very body will be destroyed.
But the mantrin who acts rightly in this way
will excellently attain the accomplishment of awakening.

All sentient beings of the ten directions
should meditate with special attention
upon what arises from the gnosis of the three bodies.
As for the enemy, here there is no doubt.

With garments moistened by blood-drinking water,
or with garments dampened by cremation ashes and excrement,
one dresses in such robes,
presses the mark with the foot,
and applying this to the wrathful king
and reciting the secret mantra one hundred and eight times —
even a buddha will certainly be destroyed.

Draping oneself in water-soaked garments,
binding them before the wrathful one,
and pressing down with the left foot —
even a buddha will certainly be destroyed.

Garments smeared with excrement and urine,
foul-smelling and contemptible —

and having donned it, if one recites the secret mantra,
the target will die or wither away at once.

Garments gathered with cremation-ground ashes,
having donned them and roused the wrathful one,
if one recites one thousand times,
even Vajrasattva will be utterly destroyed.

With hair loosened and disheveled,
the face turned away and averted,
and pressing the mark with the foot —
even the element of space will be destroyed.

One should commence the fierce practice
at a place of the Mothers, or a cremation ground,
or an empty house, or a crossroads,
at a single mark or at a single tree.

In the footprint there upon the ground,
pegs made from human bone,
measuring about eight finger-widths in length —
having recited one hundred and eight times,
one drives in such a peg
and buries it at the gate of the enemy's house.

One who is skilled in bestowing the supreme Three Bodies of the Buddha,
whether knowing or unknowing,
within half a month in the interval of the fish,
will be bound or destroyed.

Having obtained a complete and especially fine skull,
one writes the words of the secret mantra upon it,
recites with vajra syllables,
and conceals it at the enemy's gate or in the village —
they will certainly be expelled.

On a palm leaf or another suitable material,
one writes well the secret mantra of the wrathful one,
conceals it at the enemy's house or at the threshold —
they will die or wither away.

Thus declared the Blessed One, the great Vajra Vairocana.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra of Wisdom of the Kīla of the Vajra of the Three Bodies of All the Tathāgatas, and from the very vajra body, speech, and mind of this same entity called the Wisdom Body, Speech, and Mind Vajra Kīla of all three realms, these emerged:

Oṃ ghaghra, ghātaya ghātaya, sarvaduṣṭaṃ phaṭ phaṭ, kīlaya kīlaya, sarvapāpaṃ phaṭ phaṭ, hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ vajrakīla vajradhara ājñāphayati, kāyavākcittavajra, kīlaya hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ.

Then, as soon as this was uttered:
all the great and renowned lords of vajra
fell into a swoon and were seized with terror,
and remembered Vajra Vairocana.

With a peg of human bone,
or one fashioned from acacia wood,
or a peg made of iron —
even Vajrasattva will be utterly destroyed.

Resting in equipoise as Vajrasattva,
blazing with beautiful light and leaping flames,
touching the extremities with the vajra of the Three Bodies,
one visualizes the image and applies the practice.

The great seal (mudrā) of Vairocana,
or the vajra of desire,
the great seal of Yamāntaka —
one should visualize the vajra kīla
as the very wrathful one of desire itself.

O great and mighty self-existent being,
with the vajra of nectar-method union
and by means of vajra yoga,
one severs hostility and ferocity.

Even the great self-existent buddha,
from the crown down to the very soles of the feet,
one meditates upon completely by means of the vajra kīla,
and through the application of vajra meditative absorption,
even buddhas will certainly be suppressed.

This is the great wave of the kīla's power,
the samaya pledge of the gods above and below.
The great king Vajrasattva,
and the application of the meditative absorption that suppresses all buddhas —
through this, one will swiftly die or wither away.

Then the Blessed One, the great Tathāgata Vajra Vairocana, entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra of Gathering the Wisdom of the Tathāgata Body, and from the very vajra body, speech, and mind of this same secret mantra of the kīla of the non-dual samaya pledge of the vajra body, these emerged:

Oṃ chinda chinda daha daha, dīptavajracakra hūṃ phaṭ.

By means of reciting alternately,
gather it to the near side of the thumb.
Having pressed with the feet of Vairocana,
one drives it in with the vajra kīla.

By the mere act of driving it in, the great bodhisattva,
born from the wisdom of the Three Bodies —

raise it up with the supreme pledge vow. If done otherwise, it will be destroyed.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra of Gathering the Great Wisdom of the Vajra Mind, and from the very vajra body, speech, and mind of this same secret mantra called the kīla, by means of the posture of the great pledge vow, these emerged:

Oṃ vajra rāja hūṃ.

Having bound the five-pointed tip,
meditate on blazing tongues of fire.
Pressed by the feet of the Vajra Mind,
one drives it in with the vajra kīla.

By the mere act of driving it in, the great king,
born from the wisdom of the Three Bodies —
raise it up with the supreme pledge vow.
If done otherwise, it will be destroyed.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra of Gathering the Supreme Pledge of Īśvara of the World (Avalokiteśvara), and from the very vajra body, speech, and mind of this same secret mantra of the kīla of the speech pledge posture, these emerged:

Oṃ tri oṃ bhūrbhuvaḥ.

With the vajra fingers clasped together,
with the lotus blazing open,
pressed by the feet of the Vajra of Desire,
drive it in definitively with the vajra kīla.

By the mere act of driving it in, the great king,
born from the wisdom of the Three Bodies —
raise it up with the supreme pledge vow.
If done otherwise, it will be destroyed.

It is bound by body, speech, and mind.
By the mere performance of the excellent rite,
the vajra, touching the expanse of space at its edge,
will press down — of this there is no doubt.

Thus did the Blessed One Vairocana declare these words of the vajra kīla.

Then the supreme buddhas of the Three Bodies, those who aspire to benefit the realm of sentient beings, having found delight and joy, from the vajra expanse (dharmadhātu) proclaimed these words:

How wondrous — the supreme word of the secret!
How wondrous — the secret in which all is gathered!
How wondrous — the peaceful word of Dharma!
Marvellous is the wisdom vajra kīla!
This, with the kīla of all secret mantras,
follows in the wake of the Sugata's word.
These are of all the buddhas,
arising from those very kīlas.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra that Blinds All Thieves, and proclaimed this great vidyā mantra (Skt. vidyā), queen of knowledge:

Oṃ māricye devatāye svāhā.

At the very moment this knowledge mantra was proclaimed,
all the renowned buddhas of great power
became delighted and joyful at heart,
and the eyes of their heirs were opened as well.
This is the mother of all actions,
she who binds those who despise and rob.
One who abides in her practice
will not be seen when passing through existence.

Then the great Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered into the meditative absorption called Victorious through the Power of Great Wisdom that Destroys All Aversion and Liberates All Sentient Beings, and proclaimed this great queen of knowledge mantras that utterly destroys the great thousands:

Oṃ mahāsahasrapramardanā vara siddhi dāmīge maṇi vajraṇi hūṃ phaṭ svāhā.

Then, when this great knowledge mantra was proclaimed,
the buddha realms all trembled greatly,
all the bodhisattvas
and the ranks of the māras were shaken.
The chief, the Vajra Vairocana,
all having bowed according to the word,
by the power and might of the Blessed One's knowledge mantra,
all who do harm are nailed down.
Wherever the great and powerful knowledge mantra —
this subduer of adversaries — is recited,
there shall we not venture,
and there also shall we offer protection.

Then the great Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana,

entered into the meditative absorption called Vajra Victorious Through the Crushing Power That Overcomes the Demigods by the Supremacy of Śakra (Indra), and proclaimed this great dhāraṇī, the shoulder ornament of the victorious banner's crest:

Oṃ ghagabatī dhājagrakeyūre parasainyavidhvaṃsanakāsvāsainyaparilani uyukāmukhi khakha khāhi khāhi parasainya ma anantabhujeṃ anantamukhe praharā praharā hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā.

Then, when this great knowledge mantra was proclaimed,
the buddha realms all trembled greatly.
The bodhisattvas were greatly shaken,
and the ranks of the māras were scorched.
The yakṣas and rākṣasas, stripped of their garments,
became terrified and filled with dread,
and remembered the Chief, the Vajra Vairocana.
Scorched by the splendor of the Blessed One's queen of knowledge mantras,
they said: "We pray to abide by our pledges — be our protector, and fully accomplish all our bodies."

Then the great Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered into the meditative absorption called Vajra Pervading All Through Complete Birth from Every Womb, and proclaimed this great individual-following queen of knowledge mantras:

Oṃ maṇidhari vajraṇi mahāpratisari svāhā.

When this great knowledge mantra was proclaimed,
by the power of the queen of knowledge mantras,
those who harm human beings,
those of great power who steal the womb,
all evil guides and adversaries —
scorched by unbearable tongues of flame,
filled with terror and dread,
they approached Vajra Vairocana,
and touching their heads to his feet, spoke these words:
"We pray to abide by our pledges.
She who constantly keeps the pledge of the knowledge mantra,
who steals no womb whatsoever,
but ever causes the womb to flourish —"

Then the great Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata Vairocana, entered into the meditative absorption called Vajra Holding the Stream of Wealth in Full, and proclaimed this great stream of wealth, queen of knowledge mantras:

Oṃ vasudhari mahāvasudhāra vṛṣṭanipātani pasusvāhā.

The very instant this knowledge mantra called Stream of Wealth was proclaimed,
all obstructors and evil guides
became terrified and filled with dread of mind,
and drawing near to Vajra Vairocana,
spoke these sworn words:
"When the name called Stream of Wealth, Blessed One,
is proclaimed by a noble human being,
upon that one a rain of wealth shall fall,
and we shall cause them to be endowed with great riches."

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called Vajra Taming All Who Do Harm, and proclaimed this essence mantra of the rākṣasī of blazing lightning:

Are dutre ṇibrakuptaṃ caṇḍi mahābegadhari bidsādhu jitre mahoda nirautrā kapālamāladharaṇe jāṭamukuṭa maṇḍite nānāpraharaṇa dhari hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ sarvatathagatāsamaya manusmara kuru kuru hūṃ hūṃ pramadha sarvaśatrūṇāṃ śoṇitavipapracaṇḍe begadhari pacata pacata bekirata sataya hūṃ daha daha sarvaśatrūṃ sarvāduṣṭāna nigṛṇta prasādhaya hūṃ mahābhagavate jvāla jvāla hūṃ phaṭ — and one great blazing one — mevaśamānāya svāhā.

Then, when the great knowledge mantra of the rākṣasī of blazing lightning was proclaimed,
the abodes of the māras were scorched,
and the hearts of enemies withered.
The rākṣasī is drawn with charcoal on a strip of charnel-ground cloth, carefully concealed, burned with an offering of guggul incense, and the mantra recited one hundred and eight times, together with red flowers, red perfume, a torma offering,

a red food offering made for the deity, then buried at a charnel ground. Over that spot, calling the enemy by name, mustard seeds mantricized one hundred and eight times are scattered. At the very moment of burying, all adversaries and enemies shall become bound, oppressed, and stupefied.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Accomplishment that Gladdens the Assembly of Yakṣiṇī Revelers at the Feast of the Snatcher," and as the great Vajradhara, he proclaimed this secret mantra of the Snatcher:

oṃ hāritye mahāyakṣiṇīye hara hara sarva yakṣiṇī praveśanī svāhā.

Then, when the great mantra of the joyful snatcher, Hāritī the Snatcher,
was proclaimed by the great yakṣa lord,
all the yakṣiṇīs stirred and moved forward
in order to receive the accomplishment.

The wheel of the wrathful goddess — a yakṣiṇī —
eight-petaled, adorned with the Snatcher at its center,
bearing an iron hook and bearing fruit of the nelu tree,
surrounded by eight yakṣas —
through these may all the yakṣiṇīs be accomplished.

Then the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called "The Vajra of Complete Victory over All Great Illnesses," and proclaimed this great knowledge mantra of the leaf-clad forest-dwelling woman who pacifies great pestilence:

oṃ piśāci parṇaśavarī sarva māri praśamanī hūṃ phaṭ.

Then, when the great knowledge mantra was proclaimed,
the buddha realms trembled.
The hearts too of harmful illness-spreaders, rākṣasas,
and those who bear hatred, shrank.
Yamadanda wood, milk-tree, and sesame —
with milk as the smoke-offering — all become pacified.
Filling the sky in all directions
with the queen of knowledge mantras in fullness,
when one contemplates a rainfall of nectar,
harm is immediately stilled.

This is the fifth chapter from the great king of tantras, the Magical Web, the chapter presented in the sequence of the unfolding of mantra wisdom.

Then the Blessed One, the great Tathāgata Vairocana Vajra, spoke thus to Vajrapāṇi: "Listen with a mind of meditative equipoise to these various hand mudrās, perfectly arisen from the vajra wisdom of the three bodies.

That which, by mere binding,
liberates completely from all misdeeds —
if one consecrates the body here present
and meditates upon it as one's own form,
buddhahood itself will be attained;
what need then to speak of other accomplishments?

From both hands clasped into fists with both thumbs raised: this is the Tathāgata mudrā, the mudrā of blessing the body. From that same position, with the left thumb tucked inward and the right thumb raised: this is the mudrā of the Lord of the World, the mudrā of blessing the speech. From that same position, with the right thumb tucked inward and the left thumb raised: this is the mudrā of Vajradhara, the mudrā of blessing the mind. From both hands in fists, with the raised index finger of the left hand seized by the right fist: this is the mudrā of the great Vajra Vairocana. Seated in the posture of the bodhisattva hero, with the left hand placed in the lap and the right hand pressing the ground: this is the mudrā of Akṣobhya. From that same position, with the right hand made into the gesture of the supreme gift: this is the mudrā of Ratnasambhava. From that same position, with both hands made in the manner of meditation: this is the mudrā of Amitābha. From that same position, with the right hand made in the gesture of granting fearlessness: this is the mudrā of infallible accomplishment. From both hands bound in the vajra clasp, with the middle fingers crossed and extended upward: this is the mudrā of Vajrasattva. From that same position, with the first joint of the middle fingers bent and made in the manner of a jewel: this is the mudrā of Vajraratna. From that same position, with the middle fingers made in the manner of lotus petals forming a circle like a bracelet: this is

the mudrā of Vajradharma. From that same position, with the ring fingers bent inward: this is the mudrā of Vajrakarma. With both hands joined with hollow palms, the two index fingers made in the manner of a bracelet, and their tips formed in the manner of eyes at the tops of the thumbs: this is the mudrā of the Buddha Eye. From the vajra clasp, with the two index fingers held in the form of a vajra at the third joint where the ring fingers are raised: this is the mudrā of Māmakī. With both hands joined with hollow palms, made in the manner of an open lotus: this is the mudrā of White-Robed Tārā. With both hands joined with hollow palms, the two index fingers bent so as to press upon the nails of the ring fingers, the two thumbs placed in the center and bent slightly: this is the mudrā of Tārā's utpala lotus. With both hands joined in hollow-palmed clasp, the middle joints of the index fingers and ring fingers made downward in the manner of a bracelet, and the two thumbs resting to the side: this is the dhāraṇī mudrā of the Urging Goddess. Then from the vajra clasp, the two index fingers bent over the tips of the thumbs: this is the mudrā of Jewel Tārā. With both hands extended and the thumbs pressing the nails of their respective little fingers, the remaining fingers made in the form of a vajra: this is the mudrā of the Wrathful One with Furrowed Brows. With both hands separately clenched into fists, the index fingers and little fingers bound together in the manner of a chain: this is the mudrā of the Vajra Chain. From both hands clenched in fists, the ring fingers and middle fingers raised and made pointed at their tips, the middle finger crossed behind the ring finger, the two index fingers wound around in the manner of a bracelet, and the two thumbs placed to the front then bent slightly downward in the manner of a mouth: this is the mudrā of Yamāntaka. From the left hand clenched in a vajra fist, with the wrathful index finger placed at the heart, and the right hand made in the manner of a flat strike: this is the mudrā of the Wrathful One Unconquered by Others. From both vajra fists, with the little fingers knotted together in the manner of a chain and the index fingers spread wide and raised, then reversed and placed at the forehead: this is the mudrā of Hayagrīva. With the thumbs of both hands pressing the nails of the middle and little fingers, and made in the manner of a sword being drawn from its scabbard: this is the mudrā of the noble Acala. From both hands clenched in vajra fists, placed back to back, with the two little fingers bound in the manner of a chain, and the two index fingers raised and made in the form of a lasso: this is the mudrā of the King of Desire. With the index finger of the left vajra fist placed at the heart, and the right hand's wrathful finger raised in the manner of a spear: this is the mudrā of the Blue Spear. With the left vajra hand placed at the heart and the right vajra fist raised in a striking stance: this is the mudrā of the Greatly Powerful One. With both hands separately clenched in fists, the index fingers and ring fingers raised and brought together in the manner of a flower: this is the mudrā of Maitreya. With both hands joined in hollow-palmed clasp, the two index fingers pressing the nails of the two middle fingers and inserted in the manner of an opening utpala blossom: this is the mudrā of Mañjughoṣa. With the left hand placed in the lap and the right hand made in the manner of an elephant's trunk: this is the mudrā of the Incense Elephant. With the left vajra fist raised toward the sky and the fingers of the right hand made in the manner of a banner: this is the mudrā of the Wisdom Pinnacle. Seated in the posture of the Auspicious One, with the hollow-palmed hands joined and placed at the heart: this is the mudrā of Viśvabhadra. With both hands extended in the manner of ocean waves, the fingers drawn straight like waves: this is the mudrā of Ocean of Wisdom. With the left vajra fist placed at the heart and the right hand in the gesture of supreme giving: this is the mudrā of Inexhaustible Wisdom.

With the left vajra fist placed at the lap and the right hand made in the manner of a loose, hanging garment: this is the mudrā of Stacked Eloquence. With both hands made in the manner of a lotus slightly opened: this is the mudrā of Attaining Great Power. With both hands made in the manner of scattering flowers: this is the mudrā of Abandoning All Lower Realms. With both hands joined hollow-palmed and then made in the manner of pressing together, one upon the other: this is the mudrā of the Intelligence that Utterly Destroys the Darkness of All Sorrow. With both hands extended in the manner of streaming outward: this is the mudrā of Light Bearing a Net. With the right hand made in the gesture of supreme giving and the left hand made in the manner of the moon: this is the mudrā of Moonlight. With both hands made in the manner of a vase and conferring empowerment: this is the mudrā of Amitābha. With the left hand made as a vajra fist and the right fist made in the manner of revolving all around through the sky: this is the mudrā of the Treasury of Space. With the left hand extended toward the ground and the index finger and thumb of the right hand brought together in a gesture of pacification: this is the mudrā that Utterly Removes All Obscurations. From the left vajra fist, with the wrathful finger placed at the heart while uttering Hūṃ, and the right vajra fist raised with a striking motion: this is the mudrā of the Forest Hermitage of Leaves. With the left hand, extending the fingers while holding the index finger and thumb with the foot of the fingers, and the right hand made in the manner of a needle piercing and stopping up the mouths of those who do harm: this is the mudrā of the Goddess of Rays of Light. With both hands formed at the crown of the head in the manner of an umbrella with a serpent-head finial, uttering Phuḍ: this is the mudrā of the Goddess Who Dispels Poison. From the two hands in the gesture of the King of Desire, extending the two index fingers: this is the mudrā of Vajra-Hūṃkāra. From that same position, with the wrathful iron hook of the right hand hooking with Jaḥ: this is the hooking of the vajra wrathful iron hook, the summoning of all Tathāgatas — the mudrā of the Wrathful Vajra Iron Hook. With the little fingers of two vajra fists made in the manner of fangs, interlaced and placed at both cheeks, while the tongue is thick and one gazes with a wrathful glance: this is the mudrā of Vajra Fangs. From that same position, with the two little fingers bent and the two index fingers made in the manner of iron hooks, placed at the corner of the mouth while uttering Hūṃ, and the body trembling with a wrathful gaze: this is the mudrā of the Vajra Ḍākinī. With both hands forming vajra fists, the two index fingers extended, interlaced, and raised upward: this is the mudrā of the Maṇḍala. From that same position, with the two middle fingers interlaced, stretched upward and lifted: this is the mudrā of Opening the Gate. With both hands forming vajra fists, interlaced and pressed into the armpits while moving with a wrathful gaze: this is the mudrā that Terrifies All Spirits. With the left hand extended flat and facing downward, the right hand placed upon it, and both hands moving the fingers: this is the mudrā for Revealing the Illusions and Mechanisms of the Asuras and for Causing the Daughters of the Asuras to Become Mute. With the thumbs and little fingers of both hands bound together in a chain and held in place, and the remaining fingers made in the manner of a three-pronged banner, accompanied by a stamping motion, and uttering Hūṃ: this is the lower mudrā of the Wrathful Vajra. With the wrathful finger of the left vajra fist pointing in a threatening gesture: this is the mudrā of the Mistress of the Vajra. With the vajra interlace extended by the two index fingers made in the manner of a phurba dagger: this is the mudrā of Vajrakīla.

With the right hand made in the manner of a vajra fist striking downward: this is the mudrā of the Vajra Hammer. With both hands holding vajra fists, the two index fingers extended and made in the manner of casting a vajra knot: this is the mudrā of the Vajra Bonds of all the Tathāgatas. With both hands holding vajra fists made in the manner of drawing a vajra arrow: this is the mudrā of the Vajra Arrow. With both palms joined in the manner of a crescent moon, turning and extending before the face, and with a wrathful gaze, uttering "A la la": this is the mudrā of the Vajra Rakṣasī. With both hands bound in a chain, the two index fingers and thumbs made in the manner of a lotus: this is the mudrā of the Rain that Pierces All Clouds. With both hands in fists, the two index fingers made in the manner of a hook and the arms extended in a dried manner: this is the dried mudrā of the drawing of the machine phurba. With the thumbs of both hands placed in the palms, the remaining fingers fanned like wings, one foot planted on the ground and the other drawn back behind, and with a wrathful gaze, the tongue lolling, uttering Hūṃ Phaṭ and moving in sequence: this is the mudrā of Vajra Garuḍa. Even by merely forming this bond, poisons pervading the three realms are dispelled in an instant. With the two vajra fists in the manner of drawing a bow, filling with arrows in the four directions and releasing them to smash the opposing army: this is the mudrā of the Pleasing Vajra Arrow. From both fists, with the middle fingers crossed and raised, bent in the manner of a jewel, and with the two index fingers made in the manner of a hook above the extended thumbs: this is the mudrā of the Buddha Cakrī, which liberates from battle. With the left thumb pressing the fingers, the middle finger raised, and the right hand made in the manner of opening a lotus: this is the mudrā of Ha la ha la. With both fists, the two little fingers entwined, the two index fingers crossed and raised, turned back and placed at the forehead: this is the mudrā of Vajra Heruka, and when entering a charnel ground, it causes the ḍākinīs to become afraid. With the left hand holding a skull cup and the right hand holding a three-pronged lance, the hair bound up, adorned with a crescent moon, the standard raised, and the three eyes performing a dance: this is the mudrā of the dancing posture, and this is the mudrā of the Bestower of Well-being. With the left hand made in the gesture of fearlessness, the fingers slightly spread and the thumb placed in the palm, and likewise the right hand made as if holding a club: this is the mudrā of Viṣṇu. With both hands extended and made in the manner of a lotus: this is the mudrā of Brahmā. With both palms joined hollow inside and made in the manner of a flower: this is the mudrā of the Mātṛkās.

With the two vajra fists
cast behind in the manner of a knot,
may the empowerment of the jeweled crown and garland
be conferred upon Vajrasattva (Skt. Vajrasattva), Vajradhātvīśvarī, and the rest.

Remaining in meditative absorption (samādhi),
upon the gods possessing wheels,
the lords of the wheel,
imagine the secret offering to arise
that utterly fills the ground of buddhahood.

Shifting slightly with a graceful swaying manner,
moving in the manner of dance
with the mudrā of a coquette,
sing the syllable Hūṃ as a song.
Then, to gladden all the buddhas,
raise up the vajra lineage.
Then, with the manner of the garland, with a garland,
bind all the gods.
With a playful coquetry and delight in method,
circle with both hands and release them,
and circling from right to left,
perform the dance posture and place it upon the head.

In the manner of offering flowers,
whoever joins palms with flowers;
by joining the tip of incense,
the two middle fingers are turned back and raised;
by circling and rotating,
the two thumbs are placed in the manner of lamps;
turning the hands in the manner of a conch shell —

offer water-oblation in the manner of a bowl.
Then, toward all the gods,
perform the anointing gesture with the hand dance.
Then, in the manner of cymbals,
strike the two hands together well as cymbals;
blowing conch and flute,
and with both hands fan the drum-fan.
In the manner of a cooling fan, with a fan,
and with two fingers perform the victory banner.
When scattering pigments, like fine sprinklings,
stir and scatter the garland of colours.
Make the left hand in the manner of a vessel,
and with the right offer food to the gods.
Placing a multi-storied mansion,
in the manner of garments, together with garments,
bracelets, belt, anklets,
earrings, necklace — place them at the five places.
Then, in the manner of a parasol,
take hold well of a divine parasol.
When the hands, in the manner of meditative absorption,
are turned beautifully in the sky,
the ribbons that fill all the buddha fields
become of varied and manifold forms.
The hem is adorned with lotus garlands
and a net of bells and ornamental pendants.

In accordance with the ritual of this secret mantra,
by ringing the vajra bell,
the gates and doors shall also be opened.

Oṃ vajra-ghaṇṭa-raṇita, pra-raṇita, saṃ-varaṇita, sarva-buddha-kṣetra, pra-calite, prajñā-pāramitā, nāda-svabhāve, vajra-dharma-hṛdaya, santoṣaṇi hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ.

The right hand holds the vajra,
and one should praise with the vajra song
that shifts into varied and manifold forms.
This that gives delight through the Vajra Vehicle
is the ultimate offering.

Whoever has abandoned all conceptuality
and cultivated the awakening mind,
whose body, speech, and mind are perfectly pure —
that one's offering is unsurpassed.

Whatever sentient being has not cultivated
the higher vehicle of the Middle Way,
but is devoted to the lesser vehicle —
that one's offering is entirely complete.

All the renowned buddhas, the greatly powerful ones,
upon hearing those offerings,
opened their eyes in wonder
and said with great praise: "Excellent!"

"How marvellous! All the buddhas,
as the method for attaining awakening as a buddha,
have performed vajra meditation.
Without afflictions, awakening is attained.
The Vajra Great Vehicle is excellent;
it is taught excellently by the buddhas.
Profound and vast, it is excellent;
the gathering of all vajra jewels — excellent."

Then those bodhisattvas arisen from the three bodies of wisdom, upon hearing the praise of the Vajra Vehicle of all the buddhas, were filled with delight, their hair standing on end, and they praised the chief Vajravairocana with minds of joy:

Without beginning and without birth,
without change and without abiding,
free from conceptuality, like the sky —
yet it is examined by thoughts.
Whatever is investigated as method,
by that, all sons of wisdom,
through meditating on the Vajra Vehicle,
will attain even the ground of buddhahood.

So they spoke.

The vajra-holder born of great bliss
knows the great source of existence and non-existence.
Vairocana, in whom all first appeared,
with pure and stainless mind is emanated as Oṃ.
To you, the magical net encircled by a garland
of many forms and aspects — I bow.

The melodious speech that pervades all syllables
dwells as speech free from conceptual elaboration, the lord of the world.
The one with three eyes, accompanied by the goddesses, who tames beings —
who has the many modes of magical display? There is none like you.

Wherever one is attached to the nature of great bliss,
sporting together with young women,
with the right hand wielding the vajra,
and with the left hand ringing the sweet-toned bell —
all the goddesses become consorts,
and through the pledges their deeds are accomplished.

One embraces everything with one's arms,
the second, out of desire, is the power of bliss;
the third, unable to bear it, scatters garlands of flowers;
the fourth, with bliss, also shoots arrows.

Those who take up this song —

— become equal to the vajra-holder of bliss.

This is the vajra-song that delights all the buddhas.

Oṃ anuttara sarva-pūjā-megha-ungate, spharaṇa imaṃ gagana-khaṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā.

By reciting this mantra three times, all clouds of offerings without limit will be consecrated by blessing.

This is the sixth chapter of the great king of tantras, the Net of Magical Display, entitled "The Sequential Exposition of Mudrā Offerings."

Then all the Tathāgatas and all the bodhisattvas made supplication with a single, harmonious voice to the Blessed One Vairocana the Great, the Tathāgata of the vajra of body, speech, and mind:

O Tathāgata — the precious awakening mind, the stainless and cherished wisdom of all Tathāgatas, the unsurpassed — please expound it.

Then the Blessed One, understanding in his heart the supplication of all the Tathāgatas, declared this to all the bodhisattvas:

Mind is the form of the body,
and the body, too, is the form of mind;
and mind again is expressed through speech.

Then those bodhisattvas, having heard the union of body, speech, and mind of all the Tathāgatas, uttered this solemn declaration:

How wondrous! Samantabhadra,
holder of the vajra of body, speech, and mind —
phenomena are without arising,
without movement and without abiding.
This, free from the stain of conceptuality,
is proclaimed to be what must be generated.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, entered meditative absorption in the samādhi called the Vajra of Speechless Non-elaboration, and spoke this awakening mind:

These things have never arisen;
they have no substrates and no nature of reality.
Like space, objectless —
this awakening mind is firm and sure.

Thus spoke the Blessed One, the vajra-Tathāgata Akṣobhya.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Ratnasambhava, entered meditative absorption in the samādhi called the Objectless Vajra of All Tathāgatas, and spoke this awakening mind:

These things are without substance;
they have relinquished the defining marks of phenomena.
Born excellent from the Dharma of selflessness —
this awakening mind is firm and sure.

Thus spoke the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Ratnaketu.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Amitābha, entered meditative absorption in the samādhi called the Blazing Vajra-Flame, and spoke this awakening mind:

Things are without arising,
for things have no intrinsic nature;
and so it is said that they attain the rank of space —
this is the thorough proclamation regarding things.

Thus spoke the Blessed One Amitābha.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Amoghasiddhi, entered meditative absorption in the samādhi called the Gnosis-Vajra, Supreme above all Supremes of all Tathāgatas, and spoke this awakening mind:

Phenomena are luminous by their intrinsic nature,
clear and undefiled from the very beginning.
There is no sentient being and no living soul,
no buddha as such and no awakening as such.
Appearing like a dream or magical illusion —
this awakening mind is firm and sure.

Thus spoke the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Amoghasiddhi.

Then again the great bodhisattvas, Maitreya and the others, beholding the utterly pure awakening mind of the vajra-Tathāgata of body, speech, and mind of all the Tathāgatas, arose filled with wonder and uttered this solemn declaration:

How marvelous — the buddhas! How pure!
How marvelous — the teachings they have shown!
To the awakening mind, born excellent from the Dharma of selflessness,
we pay homage.

The awakening mind is to be cultivated —
born from the syllable of the Immovable One,
unborn, like a dream and so forth.
To the awakening mind we pay homage.

Having carefully considered the place and the seat,
and having taken the bodhisattva's cross-legged posture,
one abides first in the mode of the pure Dharma,
thinking: "It is pure by nature."

With the mind making the syllable Hūṃ, the vajra-bearer,
one is blessed by Vajrasattva.
One arouses pride in the jewel body.
With palms raised in praise, in the circle of the hook-mudrā,
one also draws in the deities with a hook.
Having arrived, they are first bound to their directions,
and the pledges too are to be offered.
Having presented the seats one by one,
one performs the rite of offering ablution water.
Empowerment, weapons, armor, and the like,
cymbals, offerings, and so forth — one performs their substance.
In every way one pleases them.
One who bears the nature of a yogin examines.

Three yogas are to be known:
blessing, complete examination,
and the perfection of the two form bodies —
these, the buddhas declare, are yoga.

With mantra one bestows blessing and arouses pride;
this, it is taught, is the yoga of blessing.

The awakening mind, being pure,
is the great seed of the mantra of secret awakening;
it is examined as the assembly of mudrās.
Having gradually perfected form —
that is what is called examination,
and the buddhas declare it the ritual of yoga.

From the process of contraction and expansion,
those endowed with all supreme aspects,
completed in an instant by primordial wisdom —
this is called the yoga of completion.

I, the yogin, have first examined in blessing
the conduct of the pledges.
The complete perfection of all these
is taught as the ritual of yoga.

The mind made filthy by the stain of afflictions
is purified by the awakening mind.
Saying "It is pure by nature,"
one cleanses with the three joined palms.

Once it has become pure, with discernment
one examines the mind separately and individually.
And having thus examined the mind,
one renders external existence empty of inherent nature.

Remaining in mind-only,
the habitual tendencies of the accumulations for awakening —
those very objects to be cultivated —
one contemplates in the form of a moon.

Resting on the lotus of one's hand,
fashioned by the sprout of Oṃ:
a form endowed with all the characteristics of its limbs,
one meditates as the vajra body.

Āḥ — the speech devoid of conceptual elaboration;
Mind emanates as the syllable Hūṃ.
The body blessed by the three syllables —
the lunar disc abiding in the heart:
upon that, one's own seed-syllable,
its color, form, and light, is contemplated in half-measure.
Having aroused pride, one declares:
"I am the self of the vajra."

Adorned with all ornaments in their fullness,
ornamented with a maṇḍala of light,
possessing a net of partial limbs —
one contemplates the primordial-wisdom being as complete.

Below that, by the hand-mudrā of the palm,
one performs armor, weapons, and the rest.
Empowered by the five perfectly awakened buddhas,
one is anointed with crown, garlands, and the rest.

Then below that, one emanates
the magical illusion of the buddhas' emanated activities.
In the center of the four-limbed maṇḍala,
the ten wrathful ones in the ten directions,
the proud ones and the wisdom-holding ones,
bearing weapons, arrows, and points —
the many illusory forms of varied aspect —
one consecrates them as utterly miraculous.

Having placed, in the midst of that all-pervading variety,
the fivefold great suchness-self,
one causes the wheels of the four directions to pervade.
Joy also generates its fourfold cause of joy.
The mantra-holder who enjoys with all meditative absorptions
in joy —
upon the wheel, the vajra form;
upon the lotus form, these same ones —
from all the wheels, through the very nature of the lotus,
one sports; and from the emission of the syllable Ē,
one renders oneself into a form possessed of color.
Endowed with all beautiful adornments,
one is seen as dwelling on one's own seat.

The aspect of coquettish gestures, song, and dance,
victory banners and such, colored streamers,
and the form of the offering of cymbals —

one should worship with varied offerings. Endowed with all aspects,
having meditated upon one's own body,
one avoids being overly hasty, and avoids being sluggish,
and avoids dimness, strain, and deterioration,
and having abandoned all bad conceptual thoughts,
one then recites the secret mantra.

During recitation, with the skilled right hand
one presses and rolls the vajra firmly,
while with the left hand one rings the vajra-bell,
and one makes offering through the various modes of vajra-song
and the manner of victory banners.

At the conclusion of recitation, one seals the session,
requests the deity's departure, and protects oneself.
Having meditated upon body, speech, and mind,
one may go about steadily and at ease.
Should obstacles arise,
one consecrates with the Hundred-Syllable mantra.

Through meditating thus, the one who meditates,
having swiftly attained the perfectly complete awakening
of the Vajra Vehicle,
appears like a disc of moon and sun.
Led forth by actions of every variety,
one causes the precious victory banner to be raised with great joy.
Bearing the lineage of the great-passion lotus,
one becomes the great lord, the sovereign of the world.
Glorious chief of all knowledge-mantras,
one becomes the great-bliss vajra with its iron hook.
Knowing all the illusions to be destroyed,
one becomes a wrathful one who vanquishes the proud.

This concludes the seventh chapter of the Great King of Tantras, the Māyājāla, the chapter that sequentially sets forth the stages of the wisdom-practice of meditating upon the awakening mind.

Then the Blessed One, the great Vairocana, the Vajra Tathāgata, having entered the meditative absorption called the Wisdom-Vajra of the Perfectly Complete Accomplishment of the Wheel of Command of All Tathāgatas, proclaimed this vast mass of karma-application through the wisdom of perfectly accomplishing all outer and inner wheels:

Whatever deity one places
at the center of the wheel —
one calls its name and declares
it to be a vajra maṇḍala: so says the Buddha.

For peacefulness, prosperity, and fierce activity,
when engaging in one's own karma,
one should meditate on the king of wheels
and act as the master.

For peace, one employs Locanā and Mākī.
For prosperity, the precious white-robed one.
For power, Tārā in her rosary-chain.
For the purpose of destroying epidemics and harm,
one employs Raśmī and the Hermit Lady.
For fierce activity, Māmakī,
together with the fierce-browed goddesses.

These are the play of wisdom,
the ones who follow with the vajra of passion.
When urged by that very secret mantra,
they inevitably accomplish the karmic activity.

Locanā and the goddess Mākī, the urger —
their sense faculties are pacified, like the moon.
In their two hands, a counting-rosary
and a ball-vessel for pouring on the crown, as adornment.

First emanated through meditative absorption,
a vase resplendent with the lustre of the moon,
filled to the brim with the milk of nectar —
with the two hands bearing the finest lotus earring,
one imagines it to be poured upon the sick
at the feet of Vairocana.

The jewel-lady and the white-robed one —
great of form, yellow of complexion,
the yellow goddess, shining forth,
with a jeweled lotus in hand —
first emanated through meditative absorption,
with the agreeable Victor's desire,
at the feet of Ratnasambhava:
one pours nectar in abundance,
and when the supreme jewel descends from above,
prosperity becomes incomparably beautiful.

The goddess great of form, red of complexion,
and Tārā likewise in her rosary-chain,
blazing with red light on all sides,
bearing a divine iron hook and noose —
with a wide-open, laughing gaze,
at the feet of Amitābha,
those beings who are intoxicated with pride in what is to be accomplished,
when hooked and then pierced with an arrow,
are brought under control in an instant.

For the purpose of destroying the harm of enemies,
great of form, sky-colored,
Raśmī and the Hermit Lady —
at the feet of Amoghasiddhi,
one repels with nectar as well,
in the manner described before by the wise.

The wrathful-browed goddess Māmakī —

with the complexion of an aged woman,
she cries aloud the sound of Hūṃ,
and striving to make threatening gestures with the vajra,
at the feet of Vajra Akṣobhya (the Unshakeable),
one should visualize her bringing down in wrath
a rain of vajra-fire.
With that supremely blazing vajra,
she causes the thing to be accomplished to burst and crack.
In the very instant of this rite,
that one will die,
or else will have their body destroyed.

For blessing, samaya, and empowerment,
Vajrasattva the feminine, the Jewel,
the Dharma, and the Vajra — the four female ones —
all the rites of joining are to be fully applied.
The sixteen great bodhisattvas as well
turn the unsurpassable wheel,
and when the work is done from one's own side,
they bestow results that are truly fruitful.

Dwelling gloriously in the bodies of the wrathful ones,
the king of the wrathful is to be engaged.
Having meditated on the vajra according to the rite of samaya and the rest,
one rouses him,
then takes up footprints,
and mixes them with charnel-ground ash.
Take cloth from there and mix it with human bones,
then from the soil of both riverbanks
make a form tied and then soaked with the urine of a wild ass.
From that, make an image of the enemy,
and at that moment bind the effigy.

Mix together poison, wool thread, salt,
grain, butter, and something hot,
and to generate heat in the enemy,
fill the body of the image thoroughly with these.
Then draw the consciousness, which is like wind,
in with an iron hook,
insert a fire-carrying worm inside,
and seize it firmly with a noose.
Place it in vajra fetters,
then strain and recite that one's name.
Pierce the enemy's body without remainder
with the thorns of the posona plant.
A ritual dagger made of human bone,
or one arising from acacia wood —
press it and drive it into the five places:
the forehead, the heart, the throat, and the two shoulders.
Kindle fire on a neem tree
and dry it in the blazing flame.
The skilled practitioner, beginning from the feet,
cuts with a sharp weapon,
and with a burning, wrathful body
offers the pieces in a burnt offering.

For this rite, one should additionally apply
the position of a turtle's legs.
At noon or at midnight,
this very rite is to be accomplished.

Having performed this rite, it is certain that
even one protected by a Victor
will surely die — what then need be said of Viṣṇu,
the Great God (Śiva), or Brahmā?

This is the armor of the fierce conduct of the outer.
Emanated from the wisdom of slaying,
the inner too shall now be explained.

Having guarded the thing to be accomplished in the mind,
one hooks it according to the rite.
Holding in hand a sword and weapon,
a spear, vajra, stake and noose,
bearing in hand a wheel and bow and arrow —
that one who bears various wrathful implements
binds the thing to be accomplished with a noose,
and with the vajra's wrathful king
leads it to the southern direction.
Another vajra strikes it,
cuts it with the sword,
and one visualizes the entrails spilling out loosely.

Oṃ Hūṃ Vajra Rakṣasī Bhakṣaya Tha Phaṭ.

Meditating on the vajra demoness,
surrounded on all sides by crows, foxes, and vultures,
one meditates and rouses by name
so that they devour and tear apart.

Meditating on the vajra vixen abiding in the maṇḍala of wind,
one fully examines what is to be accomplished.
Then, having mounted upon her back,
with the vajra wrathful one tormenting,
one circles around to the southern direction.
The tracks of her feet on the ground,
on a leaf stirred by wind —
having uttered the name of that one,
hide the vajra nose-ring near the nose.

If one practices and performs the rite of joining in just this way,
even Śakra (Indra) himself would be expelled —
what need is there to speak of ordinary beings on earth?

Write that name together with a secret mantra
on the feather of an owl,
bind it with the hair of a monk or brahmin,
dig a hole in the ground and insert it there.
With the two vajra wrathful ones,
send them into battle.

Through the practice conceived in that way,
separation comes about just as one desires.
Having meditated on the subtle vajra
filled with the syllable HŪṂ,
draw it out through the tip of the nose
and fill the body of the one to be accomplished.
Throughout all the joints of the body,
bind them with the manifold vajra;
with blazing vajra fire shooting forth,
dry out that body as well.
Meditate on the vajra ḍākinī
and from every direction bring destruction.

OṂ VAJRA ḌĀKINĪ AMUKAŚYA RAKTA ĀKARṢA CA ŚAYA HŪṂ PHAṬ.

Through this sequence of practice,
there is no doubt that drying will occur.
The skilled practitioner goes in the direction of the wind
and makes a square maṇḍala.
Seven drops of incense are made,
then covered with a clay bowl.
That is emanated from all of Mount Meru
to its eighth peak,
adorned with radiating vajra fire —
with those, press down upon them.
The seven winds generated by YAṂ
must be driven inside the great sign marked by LĀṂ.
By such a practice even the wind of destruction is bound.

Meditate on an eight-petaled lotus;
on its petals place the eight nāgas,
with a mass of blazing fire at the center.
Pressing the nāgas down with the soles
of the feet of the vajra wrathful one's form,
rain-clouds will pour down rain.
With HŪṂ, fill the hearts of the nāgas at the center
of the two, torment them with the spreading fire,
and by reciting HŪṂ,
rain will fall like the rain at the time of world-destruction.

A face of beautiful reddish light, the color of the sun,
spreading out to fill all of space —
clouds totally filled with rain-water from every direction —
lick them with the blazing tongue of HŪṂ.
By drawing in the breath, pulling and extracting,
scatter them entirely like cotton-fluff.
Or else, send out the blazing assembly of one's own mudrā
and in an instant cut and sever them.
If one points with HŪṂ,
even the clear sky appears as though it were autumn.

Vairocana (the All-Illuminating), dwelling in a maṇḍala of fire,
rising from the crown of the head, immovable, a servant —
victorious over māra, with six hands holding arrow and bow and noose,
sword, wheel, and vajra, raining them down —
surrounded by countless wrathful ones,
burning the obstructors, filling space with the sound of HŪṂ,
these three worlds in their entirety are destroyed.

From footprints on the ground and human blood,
make a human form; on a peg of human bone,
proclaim the secret mantra endowed with rays of light,
and twenty times apply the manifest mantra to the eye.
Insert the name into the mouth of the lord of the assembly,
and from outside strike repeatedly with vajra-pegs.

OṂ SUMBHA VAJRA MUŚLEN CŪRṆAYA NARA BHIGHĀN HŪṂ PHAṬ.

By merely conceiving of this action,
even the great obstructors of the mother will be repelled.

The sky-soarer of a thousand shimmering hues,
his body adorned with a thousand serpents,
seated in the sky, endowed with a thousand confident bearings —
command the eight nāgas and the rain-clouds.
Having heard the command of Śakra (Indra),
the gathering of clouds slays even fire with jar-like downpours.
Covering with the wings of the sky-soarer,
and cutting off every quarter with rivers scooped up by his beak.

OṂ VAJRA NĀRĀYAṆA NIRABĀYA MAHINA BAMA MUME GE HŪṂ.

The third face is the color of the autumn moon;
the four arms blaze with a variety of reddish light.
The fourth goddess, the Proud One and the Loving One,
surrounded by makara victory banners and floral play —
with the right hand, the vajra is beautifully burnished,
with the left, the vajra bell is gracefully held.
Playing in the manner of the coquettish, graceful, and charming,
the clouds arising from the hero's mind spread and multiply in all directions.
Adorned in every aspect,
crowned with a jeweled diadem, consecrated with empowerment —

She averts all thunderbolts that fall from the sky.

OṂ MAHĀ PUKKA VAJRA, CHE GE MO JDZZA — and then HŪṂ — PŪRA TA BANDHA HŪṂ PHAṬ.

Through performing this practice,
unsurpassed awakening shall spread and grow.

Then the Blessed One, the vajra Tathāgata, the great Vairocana, Akṣobhya, the Jewel, Amitābha, Amoghasiddhi — the sixteen forms of mantra kings who are good in all their aspects — along with the wrathful ones who abide in the fierce meditative absorption encompassing all things, and the vidyā queens who perfect the mantras and are endowed with every aspect, each resting in their own unimpeded meditative absorption — all of these, dwelling in their respective absorptions, beheld the assembly who were entirely furnished with all qualities with a great gaze of compassion. Then, possessing the vajra of body, speech, and mind, they gracefully moved their beautiful brows, showed a smile that enchants the limbs, and caused joy to arise in their minds.

In that very moment of causing joy, worshipped by all the most excellent buddhas, by drawing forth with great wisdom, concentrating and individually sharpening it, one abides in the meditative absorption of great bliss, and gazing with a sidelong, playful, and charming look, the two hands take the form of a lotus pressed together at the crown of the head — thus vividly displaying the path of primordial wisdom.

Then the great king Vairocana, and mighty Vajrapāṇi, with an expansive mind, respectfully offered these words: "For what reason does he gaze from the corner of his eye in every direction, move his brows, and show a smile?" In reply, with wisdom fully aroused, he spoke:

"O you who hold the great vajra of awakening — while Vajrapāṇi asks, I shall explain with words that are stable and profound: the sport of the buddhas, the excellent arising on the path of cultivation, the method of the vajra wisdoms, and how supreme bliss-awakening is attained. Let all the buddhas and the retinue who follow the buddhas listen.

"That in which all phenomena are without inherent existence, in which there are no marks of either of the two extremes, in which there is no wandering even in the middle, and which is like the sky that has transcended the three times — with skillful means and wisdom both relinquished, how can awakening be realized in that? To those who wish to realize it, I shall explain the methods.

"The awakening mind, which is the companion of those for whom the aggregates and phenomena have no inherent existence, is to be cultivated through joy and through drinking. Through this, one venerates the supreme three kāyas. Through mind, the body is attained; through mind, the Dharma teachings are given; through mind, awakening is reached. Therefore cultivate it in the manner of suchness.

"Mind is of the nature of illusion, and awakening too is like an illusion. Take as an example a skilled illusionist who recites mantras over a woman, and through habitual application, inserts them into forms beautifully fashioned — then in the mind of one who is attached, the form of a quadruped and the like appears. Likewise, the mind cultivated through the accumulation that arises from merit and primordial wisdom makes unsurpassed awakening appear in the minds of sentient beings.

"Those who do not know phenomena in their ultimate reality, who cling to outer things as substantially real, and who defile this precious mind with the mental fabrications of corrupt conceptual thought — it is said that it is endowed with all things together with the four great elements. Not knowing this, those who impute onto it purity and impurity and the like, and who, through clinging to a self with strong attachment, make the ultimate something external — how can those of the Foundational Vehicle attain unsurpassed awakening?

"Awakening has been spoken of in two forms: with remainder and without remainder. With remainder is the nature of the aggregates, wherein all afflictions are utterly burned away. Without remainder is free of habitual tendencies, pure like the sky, without stain. Unsurpassed awakening is just like this, as all buddhas have fully explained.

"In order to bring about that awakening of theirs, the methods of action are manifold. Whatever secret mantra the yogin who has always pleased the jñānasattva (the wisdom being) at whose feet he dwells, but has not yet accomplished —"

The remainder I shall now explain. By that easy method, having completely severed, the accomplishment is taught.

The great Vajra-hook, the Vajra-lasso that causes intense anguish, the Vajra-fist of awesome splendor, the Vajra-peg that binds all, the Vajra-hammer that strikes, the Black Vajra that blazes greatly — these generate terror in all the gods. These various forms of mudrā, once cultivated and applied in action, perform works without equal, for the sake of what the Victors have taught through samaya.

The master of secret mantra, having cast the hook with the syllable HŪṂ, draws the one at whose feet he dwells. If this is a buddha or one who holds the vajra, one draws him from the heart. Having entered through the samaya, one binds him with the Vajra-bond. Having seized him with the Vajra-fist, one threatens him completely with the Black Vajra. With the Vajra-peg one strikes the five places of the image: the forehead, the throat, the heart, and likewise the two shoulders. One strikes with the Vajra-hammer. Through this ritual application, even a buddha is certainly subdued. Through the application of threatening and so forth, the image is made to roll its eyes, and at that moment the siddhi (spiritual accomplishment) of the full perfection of buddhahood and awakening is bestowed. This alone is the application accomplished by power — it is the great secret.

Then all those of that fully complete retinue, having heard the secret accomplishment, with one voice all said: "Excellent!"

Excellent! O chief vajra, Vairocana the great, O great hero — "Excellent!" you say. Well done, that you have taught this supreme and most profound Dharma, this holy teaching. Excellent that for the benefit of sentient beings, the hook of compassion blazes forth on all sides. Excellent that the quintessence of wisdom blazes, accomplishing phenomena that are without self. The Great Secret, the entire teaching of the Vajra Vehicle, has been definitively proclaimed. Dwelling in this manner of the vehicle, one attains unsurpassed awakening with ease.

OṂ VAJRA AṂKUŚA ĀKUŚA ĀKARṢAYA HŪṂ. OṂ VAJRA PĀŚA BANDHA HŪṂ. OṂ VAJRA ṬĀKKĪ RĀJĀYA HŪṂ. OṂ VAJRA MUṢṬI GṚHṆA HŪṂ. OṂ VAJRA KĪLAYA KĪLAYA HŪṂ. OṂ VAJRA MUDGARA ĀKOṬAYA HŪṂ.

These supreme and pure secret mantras, made essential by the quintessence of wisdom, these works of genuine efficacy — they are not to be shown to just anyone.

This is the eighth chapter, drawn from the great King of Tantras, the Magical Net, being the section on the sequential stages of accomplishment through the method of application.

Then the Blessed One, the vajra Tathāgata, the great Vairocana, having entered into the meditative absorption called the Vajra Following All Actions, taught these works of descent and so forth.

OṂ placed at the head,
AḤ upon the face, as a lotus,
HŪṂ, having been stirred, placed at the heart,
YAṂ upon the maṇḍala of wind —
having set it there, concentrated, and made it strike,
all beings that move and all that remain still
shall fall and descend.

Regarding the form of the vessel to be descended into, having contemplated it as the very essence of that form, with the pride of a Vajradhāra one recites the secret mantra with appropriate dignity.

The unobstructed garland to be recited:

NAMAS SAMANTA BUDDHĀNĀṂ. SAMYAKSAṂBUDDHA KOṬĪNĀṂ. TADYATHĀ. OṂ CALE CULE CUNDE SVĀHĀ.

She of great and unobstructed diligence, taming beings; she of great power; she who causes great harm to enemies; she who holds in her hands a sword, a hammer, a spear, and a lasso; the great wrathful one, the sovereign mistress of wrath; she who possesses a fierce form; she of limitless faces; she of a thousand hands; the unconquerable one; she whom others cannot withstand; she who is efficacious; she who is difficult to tame; she of a thousand eyes; she who has been blessed by all the Tathāgatas; she whom all gods worship and to whom offerings are supremely made —

She who has vajra nails; she who draws forth the vajra; she who possesses vajra weapons; she who has a vajra body; she who has a vajra-gaze with a direct and steady bearing; though she is wrathful, she appears in a form assumed as one possessed of wrath. Her body is adorned with vajras and lapis lazuli.

OṂ BHAGAVATĪ CUNDE DRUṂ DRUṂ DRUṂ DRUṂ. MṚ MṚ. RU RU. SRU SRU RU RU GṚHṆA GṚHṆA ĀVEŚAYA. GṚHĀPAYA GṚHṆĀPAYA. SARA SARA. MĀRAYA MĀRAYA. HARA HARA. BHAÑJA BHAÑJA. MARA MARA. MĀRAYA MĀRAYA. VACA VACA. DAHA DAHA. GṚHṆA GṚHṆA.

Hostile spirits; fevers lasting one day, two days, three days, four days; chronic fever; intermittent fever; elemental spirits; reanimated corpses; yakṣas; rākṣasas; kumbhāṇḍa spirits; those born from a womb; those born from action; those that wander; those that dwell — all of these, and all those hostile ones who harm me:

SĀDHAYA SĀDHAYA. MARDAYA MARDAYA. ŚOṢAYA ŚOṢAYA. TĀPAYA TĀPAYA. UTPĀDHAYA UTPĀDHAYA. HANA HANA. VAJREṆA SARA SARA DAṆḌENA. MARA MARA. KHAḌGENA HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ. CUṂ CUṂ CUṂ. TRI TRI TRI. OṂ CALE CULE CUNDE SARVA SĀDHAYA SVĀHĀ.

Now, having been urged by the vajra, one should ring the vajra bell, and one should praise the vajra bond. OṂ — dwelling in the great powerful maṇḍala.

In the center, place an eight-petalled lotus, and having placed a related lotus connected to it, adorn it with eight syllables AḤ. Having placed the object to be accomplished in the center, beautify it with four HŪṂ syllables. Place it inside two bowls joined at the rim, and press it down above by holding a vajra. While meditating and reciting with the words of the secret mantra's invocation, perform the recitations. By means of the vehicle known as BA, draw it in from all sides.

This, arisen from the three bodies, will press down upon all gods and humans. The master of mantra expertise should be imagined as red in color, vajra-bearing, having a form endowed with great passion, together with the god of desire. Possessing the three bodies, holding an arrow in one hand and a bow in the other. Having visualized OṂ HŪṂ at the crown of the woman's head, with passion, pierce and agitate the heart. With palms joined and in red color, placed in front as if bowing, when pierced with the vajra arrow, drops flow from the lotuses. By the application of the vajra arrow, the passionate one comes to drip. For the purpose of the yogin's dominion, meditate also on the vajra of passion.

Make a small drum from a human skull, cover it with monkey skin, and on both sides draw a lotus. Make it drip with a woman's blood. In its center draw the syllable BREṂ, tie it with human hair, and using the leg bone of a blue-black corpse, reciting the names PHREṂ HŪṂ, strike it. At the crossroads at the four corners of the path, draw the maṇḍala with the big toe of the left foot. In the corners, make a hook of iron diligently applied to summon the serving girl. Strike from behind with a form wearing the costume of the chief blood-drinker. By this, the serving girl dispersed through the three realms will be summoned.

Abiding in pride with respect to an image of whatever form it may be, when the yogin's wheel practice is complete, by word and form alone, the yogin accomplishes everything for gods, demigods, humans, and so forth. When one dwells in the state of mastery, all become subject to one's command. Supremely, one may kill by mere glance, or cut with fire alone.

Urged by the wisdom of illusion, the yogin performs song and dance. In whatever way one meditates, in just that way one conducts beings. Since the fire god who dwells in that very fire offering is its face, it is fully taught from the fire offering that accomplishes the various actions.

The fire offering satisfies the gods, and having been satisfied, they bestow attainments. Whatever excesses or deficiencies occur in the secret mantra practice, all are restored through fire offerings. Therefore the supreme sage, master of the three bodies, has greatly praised the fire offering.

Fire that arises from the fire-drill performs virtuous actions. Fire arising from an outcaste or from a charnel ground accomplishes all manner of rites with excellence.

The fire-pit may be round, four-sided, crescent-shaped, or triangular. The corners of the maṇḍala are adorned with vajra symbols on the raised edges of each cardinal face.

Knowing the proper method of this very fire offering, in the center of the fire-pit one places upon a lotus the uṣṇīṣa, the vajra, the jewel, and the lotus, and one takes one's seat there as befits the occasion, hands resting between the knees. One fills the ladle with ghee and, having filled the pouring ladle, one makes the burnt offering in the same way. The implements needed for the fire offering are placed to the right; water vessels are arranged to the left. Having recited to accomplish all rites, one performs the fumigation offering and the scattered drink offering. Pressing the ground around the rim of the fire-pit with the tips of kuśa grass, knowing that the fire is blazing, one moves the fearlessness mudrā with the right hand, and by this secret mantra and in accordance with the rite, one invites the fire deity:

Come hither, come hither, great spirit, divine seer, supreme brahmin. Having received the oblation and the food offered in the fire, remain here, I pray.

Oṃ agāye dīvya dīvya āveśa mahāśriye havya kavya vahānāya svāhā.

With the left hand one makes the vajra fumigation offering and presents the five offerings of the water of worship and the other offerings of homage. The deity summoned from the direction of fire is of great girth, with three eyes, four faces, four arms, his hair standing in braids of red light, dwelling in the maṇḍala of fire and adorned with rays of the light of activity. His first hand bestows the supreme gift; in his second he holds a rosary of mantra jewels. In his left he holds a water pot and a ladle for pouring; in the second left hand is a dagger. His color is red; he bears no ornaments; he is surrounded on all sides by seers. Visualizing this form, one invites him to be present in the center of the fire-pit.

Then, for the fire offering, one makes three complete rounds of the burnt oblation from all sides. After that, having performed the scattered and drink offerings, one transforms the appearance into the blazing form. By the method of this sequence, the skilled one satisfies the gods. Having well and truly satisfied them and requested their forbearance, one makes petition for the desired attainments.

The wise one examines the auspicious signs: grasping, the victory banner, the vajra, the parasol, the lotus, the iron hook in their various forms, the white-gleaming tongue of flame, and the swirling marks. When these appear, swift accomplishment will follow, so one should apply oneself to meditation and recitation.

For the peaceful, enriching, and magnetizing rites, one begins with oṃ and ends with svāhā, sustaining an unbroken melodic flow joined with a vowel-sound that is free of interruption. With a peaceful mind one performs the peaceful rite; one visibly extends abundant prosperity; assuming a proud and dignified bearing and demeanor, one performs magnetization upon those who are to be subdued. Dwelling in wrathful conduct, one employs hūṃ together with phaṭ, and, having visualized one's body blazing with tongues of fire that menace all three worlds, one definitely applies the mantra syllables of incitement and amplification.

One who knows the perfected mantra and the ritual procedures should offer homage in all fire-offering rites to whichever deities are associated with the diverse activities. Urged on by the fire offering itself, one first performs the filling, the pouring, the burning, and the presenting; thereafter one develops these progressively in due sequence for the peaceful, enriching, and magnetizing rites. Virtuous substances are offered in the fire for the peaceful, enriching, and magnetizing rites. Feces, urine, blood, bones, and great flesh may also be offered in the fire.

If one understands that the mouth of the wisdom bodhisattva is filled with impure substances, how could demerit fail to arise? And if demerit does arise, what is the result?

Sentient beings, confused through ignorance, have abandoned all wisdom entirety —

Those who cling to outer objects with attachment, made dull by the web of conceptual thought — these beings have divided phenomena into the two heaps of virtue and non-virtue. Yet all these phenomena are pure by their intrinsic nature, without arising and without abiding. The buddhas, through their skillful means, have taught this so that the understanding of sentient beings might be cultivated.

If virtue itself is abandoned for the sake of the ultimate aim, what need is there to speak of the absence of merit? Consider this example: sentient beings who wish to cross to the far bank of a river full of water gather grass, wood, and similar materials and fashion a raft to cross the river. Once they have grasped it and crossed over well, they leave it behind and proceed on their way in ease. In just the same way, having cultivated the path of Dharma that reaches to the far shore beyond saṃsāra, one then casts aside both Dharma and what is not Dharma and attains the happiness of awakening.

Therefore, setting aside straightforward conceptual thought, one propagates the profound Dharma. Do not conceptualize on the path of the mantra knowledge taught by the Tathāgata. Conceptual thought is great delusion; it causes one to fall into the ocean of saṃsāra. Aspire instead to non-conceptual meditative absorption, stainless as the sky.

The two faculties are united; body, speech, and mind are restrained; and the form, radiant with the pride of the "I am," is adorned in every aspect. The yogin who possesses this will, in this very life, come to have wisdom perfectly complete.

Among the many forms of men and women that are manifested as arising from karma, one must not despise any of them — this is the samaya of the vajra body. Among sentient beings whose minds are enmeshed in nets of ill-thought and good-thought, one must not exhaust them with various afflictions — this is the samaya of the vajra mind. Not speaking words made coarse or subtle by craving, and making those who hear feel at ease — this is the samaya of the vajra speech.

Vairocana, the supremely stirred and excellent one, dwells in the element of flesh. Immovable at the feet is the king, and chief among those arising in blood is the Jewel-Born. In the clusters of bone of the skeletons of sentient beings, Amitābha abides. Guiding all the assemblies of the channels is the Sage, the Supreme of the Arisen, Amoghasiddhi.

This great secret that I have taught, to those who know the samaya — let those of keen intellect with the vajra mind always rely upon it and meditate upon it.

Attachment, aversion, and likewise delusion; craving, and likewise its proliferations — these five phenomena have been taught by the Sages, the Supreme of the Arisen. Feces, urine, semen, saliva, blood, and the outflow gathered together under the four elements: with an intellect of meditation fully complete, one should rely upon these as samaya. One should always eat and drink them.

This is the ninth chapter, "The Sequential Analysis of Fire Offering," from the great king of tantras, the Māyājāla.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Vairocana, the vajra Tathāgata, entered into the meditative absorption called "the Vajra of Supreme Accomplishment of All Meditative Absorptions," and thereupon declared this supreme great vajra accomplishment of all samayas.

Vajrapāṇi, having been properly roused by the ritual of the yoga of secret mantra practice, hear this great secret — the method for accomplishing the accomplishment of all substances.

Abiding in the meditative absorption of Vairocana, and having meditated upon the body, speech, and mind, place the wheel (cakra) well before you. Meditate upon the forms of the three bodies possessing the vajra — with blazing garlands and shimmering light — as having entered into the interior of the wheel, and accomplish the wheel. With light blazing like the light of fire, the great wheel will become exalted. While reciting the mantra with the eyes, take up the supreme wheel. The six great wheels of the great kings, with light like Vairocana, will turn the wheel of Dharma for those sentient beings who enter three times. Meditate with complete steadiness, and —

Place the vajra before you, and by activating it step by step, the three bodies will multiply and expand, and with the equal light of great blazing garlands, the great vajra will become exalted. Reciting along with Māmakī, take up the unsurpassed vajra. By taking up the vajra-king, the chief one becomes a second Vajradhara. The great chief one — a buddha — surrounded by bodhisattvas, roaming through the world-realm, and Vajrapāṇi, who is Vajradhara, who dwells in the minds of all sentient beings, fulfills the wishes of all.

When meditating upon Ratnasambhava, place the jewel before you, and by elaborating it through the stages of practice in sequence, the great jewel will become exalted. Reciting along with Ratnā Tārā, take up the king of jewels — he who possesses beautiful, blazing, majestic light, who illuminates all directions. By taking up the divine jewel, one becomes a second Ratnasambhava. He is, for all sentient beings, like a wish-fulfilling jewel, a precious gem; he rains down a shower of jewels and destroys the poverty of all sentient beings. The chief one who possesses the wish-fulfilling jewel roams through buddha-fields.

Having fully meditated upon Amitābha, place the great lotus before you. By venerating it with majesty stage by stage — adorned with many millions of petals, blazing with beautiful golden light — the great lotus will become exalted. With the secret mantra of the White-Clad Lady, take up the mind-born lotus. By taking up the king of lotuses, one becomes a second Amitābha. He leads those who perform the Dharma's works and bestows nectar upon sentient beings. The chief illuminator of buddha-fields, he becomes the ornament of the Land of Bliss.

Having fully meditated upon Amoghasiddhi, place the sword before you. By activating it through this very yoga sequence and meditation, with light like a blazing vajra, the great sword will become exalted. Reciting along with the secret mantra of Tārā, take up the unsurpassed sword. Then, having taken up the supreme sword, one becomes a second Amoghasiddhi. He roams through buddha-fields, cuts the ignorance of sentient beings, and always appears stainless — like the autumn moon reflected in water. Having demonstrated the siddhis of substance, accomplish the great seal (mahāmudrā).

She who abides in the great yoga, the great queen of the Tathāgata, leader of the family of aversion, she who has the vajra throne — Māmakī; the goddess of Ratnasambhava, the goddess who governs beings, she who enjoys enjoyment in space — I have explained these in sequence.

Then a wide-eyed girl, sixteen years of age, endowed with beauty, complexion, and youth, with swaying golden earrings — sought out and gathered one by one, the goddess is well adorned and purified. She who possesses the assembly of the five families, having been meditated upon in accordance with action — by the practice of placing and offering, place the vajra on the lotus; by offering and embracing, arouse the vajra and the lotus. As they transform into the manner of dance, and likewise in the moments of expanding and gathering, intoxicated with the pride of illusion, from the vajra arises nectar. From the wisdom of the one endowed with yoga, drink the nectar that abides in the lotus; with the mouth of the one endowed with yoga, drinking it, one obtains the complete transformation of the body of the five Tathāgatas. In all phenomena like space, skillful means and wisdom multiply and expand together. This is the accomplishment of the very essence of the body of all buddhas: by accomplishing it through the bliss of awakening, which follows the qualities of the five objects of desire, having consecrated the vajra and the lotus, one will attain it through passionate attachment. The great siddhi — the secret siddhi — is the means of joy without suffering.

Through passionate attachment, bliss arises,
and one becomes gladdened by the Vajra Vehicle.
By this particular method of union,
I have explained the secret mantra of the three-time entry
and the mudrā of the path.
These hand mudrās,
by the vigorous rousing of the wisdom mudrā,
will be accomplished through the supreme pledge.
The great Sage (Śākyamuni), possessing manifold forms,
will perform manifold enlightened activities.

Then Vajrapāṇi drew forth this very wheel of the pledge of the three realms, the vajra body, speech, and mind of this very cycle, from his own body, speech, and mind of the vajra.

The earth element is proclaimed as the eye.
The water element is declared to be Māmakī.
Tārā is called throughout as the wind.
Pāṇḍaravāsinī is proclaimed as fire.
The pledge of the vajra is the expanse of space.
Thus has the Teacher, the vajra-holder, declared.

So spoke the great bodhisattva Vajrasattva, the Blessed One, the lord of the ground of all Tathāgatas.

Then the Blessed One, the Vajra Tathāgata, entered into meditative absorption in the samādhi called "abiding in equality with all Tathāgatas in the vajra body, speech, and mind of all Tathāgatas," and, gazing out upon the maṇḍala of the retinue of all Tathāgatas, he remained utterly silent.

Then the great bodhisattva Maitreya (Loving-kindness) paid homage to all the Tathāgatas and spoke these words: "Blessed One, how are all the Tathāgatas and all the bodhisattvas to regard the ācārya (vajra master) who confers empowerment through the gathered secret vajra body, speech, and mind of all Tathāgatas? O son of good family, all the Tathāgatas and all the great bodhisattvas should regard him as the vajra bodhicitta. For what reason? Because the bodhicitta and the vajra ācārya are these two and yet are not to be made into two." From this point onward, O son of good family, it should be explained again in summary form.

In the world-realms of the ten directions, as long as buddhas and bodhisattvas reside and dwell, all of them, coming from the three times, honor the ācārya with offerings made by all the Tathāgatas, and then declare: "We are the fathers of all Tathāgatas. We are the mothers of all Tathāgatas. We are the Teachers of all Tathāgatas." Having thus brought forth the three syllables of vajra, they return once more, each to their own buddha field.

O son of good family, consider this: the mass of merit of a single pore of that vajra ācārya vastly surpasses the mass of merit of all the buddha Blessed Ones dwelling in the ten directions, constituted by the merit of their vajra body, speech, and mind. For what reason? O son of good family, the bodhicitta, having become the very essence of the wisdom of all buddhas, is the source of the wisdom of omniscience.

Then the great bodhisattva Maitreya, his mind gripped by awe and fear, fell completely silent.

Then the Tathāgatas Akṣobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amoghasiddhi, Amitābha, and Vairocana entered into the samādhi called "the vajra focused on the pledge of the siddhi of all vajra-holders," and, calling out to those bodhisattvas, they declared: "O all you wise bodhisattvas, listen!

The blessed buddhas who have arisen in the ten directions and three times come into the presence of the vajra master, make offerings, and are said to bow down in homage. And why is this? Because the vajra master is the teacher of all Tathāgatas and all bodhisattvas, and the Blessed One Vajradhara himself is the sovereign lord of all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Then those bodhisattvas addressed those Tathāgatas with these words: "O Blessed Ones, in what does the siddhi of the vajra body, speech, and mind of all the Tathāgatas reside?"

All the Tathāgatas declared: "The three secrets of the vajra body, speech, and mind reside in the body, speech, and mind of the vajra master."

All the bodhisattvas then asked: "In what do the secrets of the vajra master's body, speech, and mind reside?"

"They reside in space."

"In what does space reside?"

"It resides in the mind of the vajra master."

"In what does mind reside?"

"Nowhere whatsoever."

Then those great bodhisattvas, struck with wonder, fell completely silent.

The maṇḍala, meditative absorption, mudrā, standing posture, sitting posture, recitation, fire offering, making of offerings, application to ritual action, and the concluding gathering — these ten are declared to be the very suchness of mantra.

The secret, the great secret, and the teaching of the essence of the three aspects of gnosis belonging to the Victors of the three times who are of one taste in compassion — these are to be understood by a devoted student from the lips of the master. The master is to explain them according to the samaya exactly as he sees it. With concentrated effort, he is to teach sentient beings yoga, great yoga, and supreme yoga in their proper sequence. All of this is to be understood as applying generally to all tantras.

If, without fully understanding all the principles of suchness, one teaches the ritual procedures of mantra with the arrogance of proclaiming "I am a speaker of mantra," all samayas will be broken. If one breaks the samayas, one will be seized by māras. When that person dies, they will go to the unbearable great hell. Knowing, therefore, that awakening is to be attained in dependence on sentient beings, one must not deceive sentient beings — and with that understanding, one is to engage those very sentient beings in the path of the Tathāgata.

Those who have not strived in this will never, no matter what hardships they undergo — even the hardship of giving away their hands, feet, and eyes, or whatever austerities — be able to destroy evil or obtain the taste of the nectar of immortality. But if one thoroughly masters even a single yoga and then goes to a solitary place and meditates, one will be liberated from evil and, in this very life, will come to possess the qualities of a buddha. By meditating on the selflessness of phenomena (dharmanairātmya), one is to fully internalize the yoga of omniscience. Through the manner of employing wisdom and primordial gnosis, one is to make offerings to the chief lord who is the very nature of the five secrets.

All things are without intrinsic existence —
the meaning of the forty is grasped through contemplation.
Through empowerment by vajra and lotus,
one is made joyful by the five nectars.

The Dharma that is to be kept secret —
secret and hidden, it is to be set aside.
The forms of the five sense pleasures —
form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and the rest —
the yoga hero is to engage with these,
and likewise with food and drink;
and through the manner of gazing and the gesture of the fist,
one brings all sentient beings under one's sway.

This has been the tenth chapter of the Great King of Tantras, the Magical Web, setting forth in sequence all the ritual procedures.

When the Blessed One had thus spoken, the entire retinue — gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas (celestial musicians) — rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had declared.

The Great King of Tantras, the Magical Web: the profoundly secret way of the Supreme Great Vehicle within the Great Vehicle — the great secret that is more secret even than the secret — is complete.

Translated, edited, and established in final form by the great translator, the monk Rinchen Zangpo.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The opening assembly description is syntactically dense and elliptical in the Tibetan, with a long series of instrumental and locative constructions that do not all have explicit main verbs. The translation resolves these as a unified descriptive passage, which is the standard way such tantra colophons and nidānas function. The phrase rendered "great serpents" for lto-'phye-chen-po (literally "great belly-crawlers") refers to a class of serpentine supernatural beings, sometimes identified with mahorāgas in Sanskrit; rendered descriptively here for TTS clarity. The phrase "goddess-queens of the knowledge-mantras" renders rig-sngags-kyi lha-mo-rnams, i.e., the vidyādevīs or knowledge-goddess consorts associated with mantra. The final long sentence in which the Blessed One enters samādhi and then "speaks" is itself a standard tantric narrative device: the tantra's content is revealed through the Blessed One's absorption, and the list that follows names the topics he declares. The term rendered "sacred pledges" is dam-tshig, the standard for samaya.  The phrase "colored pigments of karma" renders "las kyi tshon rtsi," which literally means "the pigment-paint of karma." This is a technical ritual reference to the practice of observing where a flower or pigment falls in the maṇḍala during empowerment, indicating the presiding deity of the recipient's karmic disposition. The translation preserves the literal sense since it is a deliberate tantric image.

The list of negative qualities in the middle section describes a person who is not qualified to be a master. The Tibetan syntax presents these as disqualifying attributes before stating that one endowed with the earlier positive characteristics alone should be accepted as master. The translation preserves this logic.  The long catalogue of postures, gestures, weapons, and methods in the second half of this passage is a technical tantric enumeration. Many items in this list are ritual and iconographic terms whose precise meaning is fixed in the living commentarial tradition but whose individual Sanskrit equivalents are not always self-evident from the Tibetan alone. The rendering follows the most natural lexical equivalents. The term rendered "zombie posture" for རྡོ་རྗེ་རོ་ལངས་མ literally means "vajra-risen corpse," a recognized tantric category. The phrase སྟོབས་པོ་ཆེའི་འདེགས་པ, rendered "lifting of the great powerful one," could alternatively refer to a specific named deity or mudrā; the identification is uncertain.  The text closes mid-sentence with "Then, rising up gracefully" — this is where the supplied Tibetan ends, and the sentence continues in the following passage.

The directional assignment of the four female attendants in the corners (Locanā, Māmakī, the White-Robed One, and Tārā) follows the standard Yoga-tantra maṇḍala schema: east = Indra's direction (lord of empowerment), southeast = fire, southwest = the "truthless" or "deception-free" direction (a less standard designation, possibly northwest in some reckonings), and northwest = wind. The Tibetan directional epithets are here rendered by their standard identifications rather than by literal translation of the directional terms, which vary across traditions. This is noted for scholarly readers.  Several of the bodhisattva and deity names in the third ring are Sanskrit-based titles rendered as Tibetan descriptive phrases. Elephant of Incense renders Gandhahastin, Jñānaketu is straightforward, Surakṣita renders Bzang-skyong, Sāgaramati renders Blo-gros-rgya-mtsho, Akṣayamati renders Blo-gros-mi-zad-pa, Pratibhānakūṭa renders Spobs-pa-brtsegs-pa, Mahāvikrāmin renders Mthu-chen-thob, and Jalinīprabha renders Dra-ba-can-gyi-od. These names are well attested in Mahāyāna sūtra literature and the renderings here follow standard scholarly identification.

The mantric syllables Hūṃ oṃ jina-jik, āḥ ārolik, etc. are transliterated as given in the Tibetan; their precise Sanskrit reconstruction is uncertain but they follow recognizable Vajrayāna formulaic patterns.  The five seed-syllables at the close correspond to the five Tathāgatas of the standard Vajrayāna maṇḍala: Vairocana, Akṣobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi. The Tibetan "དོན་ཡོད་གྲུབ་པ" is the standard rendering of Amoghasiddhi, literally "he whose aim is accomplished without fail."

The phrase "ཐུར་མ" rendered as "nail" may alternatively indicate an awl or pointed ritual implement; the precise object is contextually uncertain, but the list reads as ritual tools used to demonstrate the characteristics of the Dharma to the newly initiated student, likely by touch or symbolic display.  The epithet rendered "the Invincible One" for Prajñāntakṛt follows the Tibetan gloss གཞན་གྱིས་མི་ཐུབ་པ, literally "that which others cannot overcome," corresponding to the wrathful deity Aparājita or a similar figure. The identification is doctrinal rather than universally fixed across traditions.

The phrase "the King of Desire" for Oṃ Ṭakki Hūṃ renders the Tibetan འདོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ. The deity Ṭakkirāja is a wrathful form associated with the desire realm; the identification is standard in this tantra's commentarial tradition.

The final line "Accomplished through the wisdom of Oṃ —" is the opening of a new doctrinal passage and breaks off here as the Tibetan passage ends mid-sentence.  The phrase rendered "pouring three pills from above" translates "ril ba spyi blugs gsum pa na," which is unusual. "Ril ba" can mean pills or round objects; "spyi blugs" suggests pouring onto the crown of the head or from above generally. The precise ritual meaning — whether these are nectar-pills being poured or something else — is not wholly transparent from the text alone, and a ritual commentary would clarify.

The identification of the deity in the Hūṃ section as Akṣobhya ("mi 'khrugs," the imperturbable one) sitting in the crown is standard iconography for Vajrasattva or the Vajra-family, but the text here presents a composite figure; the "Akṣobhya residing in the crown" rendering follows the literal "mi 'khrugs bzhugs" (the Imperturbable one resides).  The four female consorts named here — Mind Consort (sems ma), Jewel Lady (rin chen ma), Dharma Lady (chos ma), and Vajra Action Lady (rdo rje las ma) — are standard tantric consort figures. Their Sanskrit equivalents would be Cittā, Ratnā, Dharmā, and Vajrakarmā respectively, though the text gives only the Tibetan names.

The phrase rendered "Eye Goddess" for sems ma bzhi refers to a specific deity whose full epithet is here glossed as Prajñācakṣus based on the context "ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྱན་གྱིས་སྣང་བར་བྱེད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཇོ་ཚུལ" — the reconstruction is approximate.

The syllables La, Ma, Pa, Tā, and Tsuṃ appear to be seed syllables (bīja) from which the respective goddesses are accomplished; their precise tantric identification depends on the larger ritual context of this text, which is not given here.  The passage is a sādhana-style iconographic description enumerating attributes, implements, and meditative absorptions of several goddesses. The names of the meditative absorptions at the end of each section are compound titles that have been rendered literally; these are epithets functioning as proper names of specific samādhis.

The term rendered "round vase for pouring over the head" (ril ba spyi blugs) refers to an abhiṣeka-style vessel poured from above; this rendering captures both the form and its ritual connotation.

The fruit bījapūra is the Sanskrit name for the citron or a citron-like fruit (Citrus medica); it appears untranslated as it is a proper iconographic term.  The name "Vajra Chain" renders Tibetan rdo rje lu gu rgyud, which corresponds to Sanskrit Vajraśṛṅkhalā. The term is used both as the name of the deity and of the meditative absorption.

The bodhisattvas listed in the Ākāśagarbha sequence — Fragrant Elephant (Spos kyi glang po, Gandhahastin), Wisdom Pinnacle (Ye shes tog, Jñānaketu), Surakṣita (Bzang skyong), Ocean of Intelligence (Blo gros rgya mtsho), and others — are standard members of the Mañjuśrī maṇḍala retinue. Their Sanskrit names are here given from the established tradition.

The passage ends mid-sentence with the Akṣobhya reference (mgo yi steng nas mi 'khrugs pa), indicating the text continues beyond what is provided here.  The term rendered "destroyer of obstructing spirits" for bgegs kyi gshed translates bgegs (Sanskrit vighna, obstructing spirits or obstacles personified) and gshed (slayer, destroyer). The figure described in this section is a wrathful emanation associated with Vajrapāṇi's retinue.

The phrase "brings the lotus to its end" for padma mthar byed pa is an epithet whose precise referent is uncertain; it may mean he destroys or subdues the lotus-family obstructors, or it may be a name-epithet of the deity class. This is noted as a genuinely consequential interpretive question.

The term dgra star in the second figure's second right hand is rendered "dagger for enemies"; star (or gri gug) typically denotes a hooked or curved blade used in ritual contexts.  The phrase rendered "the King of Desire" translates a proper name, Kāmarāja, a form of the deity being described in this section. The identification with Kāmarāja, the god of desire, as a subordinate wrathful emanation within this tantric cycle is consistent with the wider context.

The phrase rendered "like flowing water in color" is a Tibetan idiom for a glistening, luminous pale or blue-grey hue; the comparison to water suggests a lustrous sheen rather than transparency.

The "Unmoving One" appearing on the crown in the final deity's description refers to Acala or Akṣobhya, consistent with the broader cycle's iconographic convention of placing the presiding buddha on the crown.  The term rendered "dwelling of harm" for གནོད་གནས་འདི་འདྲ is somewhat compressed in the original; it may indicate the yakṣa deity's visualization form or its abode, used as an object of meditation for wealth practices. The meaning is that meditating on this yakṣa's form yields material abundance.

The fruit name བཱི་ཛ་བཱུ་རི་ནེའུ་ལེ is a transliteration of Sanskrit bījapūraka, a type of citron or lemon-like fruit commonly held as an attribute of yakṣa wealth deities.

The phrase གནོད་སྦྱིན་གནོད་གནས་སྐུ་གསུམ་ཅན could also be read as "the yakṣa whose three bodies constitute the site of harm," but "possessing the nature of harm and dwelling, with three bodies" preserves the ambiguity present in the Tibetan.  The passage identifies "Hālāhala" as the name of a wrathful deity accomplished through the syllable Tri. In classical sources Hālāhala is the name of a deadly cosmic poison associated with Śiva, here appropriated as the name or perhaps an epithet of a tantric deity; the text treats it as a proper name without further gloss, and I have followed that usage. The description in this section, including the crescent moon, tiger-skin lower garment, skull-cup, and triple-pointed spear, makes clear the figure is a Buddhist adaptation of Śiva iconography, though the text names it simply as this deity.

The phrase rendered "the second holds a breast" translates a term literally meaning "holding the breast/nipple," which in tantric iconographic language may indicate a gesture or attribute associated with the deity's nurturing or powerful aspect; I have translated it literally as the text gives it.  The phrase rendered "vajra-zombies" translates the compound meaning vajra-risen corpses or vajra-zombies, a category of wrathful animated being in tantric ritual context. The rendering is approximate but consistent with the tradition.

The phrase "child-killers" and "womb-devourers" renders two specific categories of malevolent spirits associated with harm during birth and pregnancy. The Tibetan terms are technical designations for these beings in the tantra's ritual setting.

The "Unshakeable One" on the crown refers to Akṣobhya, a conventional identification in this class of tantra for the presiding tathāgata upon the crown of wrathful goddesses.  The figure Aphrāmā and her five hundred sons, along with Pañcaratna and Śrīmatī, are yakṣiṇī-class deities appearing in this cycle; the Tibetan reads "འཕྲོག་མ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་ལས་སྐྱེས་པའི" which could be parsed as "born from the action of the Seizer, Aphrāmā," or alternatively as two separate figures ("Aphrāmā" and "Aphrāmā the Seizer"); the rendering above treats the phrase as a compound epithet for clarity.

The mantra syllables and the proper names of the deities appearing within mantras are rendered phonetically as they appear in the Tibetan transliteration, following standard convention for untranslatable liturgical speech.  The phrase rendered "of one or two stirrings" for སྲུབས་གཅིག་པའམ་སྲུབས་གཉིས་པའི is genuinely uncertain. The term སྲུབས can refer to stirring or churning in a ritual context, possibly indicating the age or preparation stage of a skull-cup used in tantric practice. This is a technical ritual term whose precise referent is unclear without commentary.

The compound མྱུར་བར་ཁུགས་ཀྱི་བར་དུ་ནི, rendered "swiftly, up to the throat," reads literally as "swiftly up to the space of the throat." The ritual context — pressing with the foot while reciting — suggests a subjugation rite, but the exact procedure is opaque without a ritual manual.  The verse section on Vairocana's footprint and the vajra wheel is compressed and elliptical in the Tibetan. The imagery describes a ritual in which the practitioner presses a wrathful vajra-wheel seal onto the footprint left by Vairocana on the earth and onto leaves stirred by wind, while invoking the lord of assemblies — likely Gaṇapati — who stations himself there, and through HŪṂ and PHAṬ performs an expulsion rite so powerful it can drive away even vajra-bearing buddhas. The reading "even the vajra-bearing buddhas are driven away" renders the climactic boast of the rite's potency.

The epithet "Vajra Boundless" for the Tathāgata who draws forth Vajra Lotus is a translation of Vajrānanta; it likely corresponds to Akṣobhya or an associated buddha form in this tantra's system, but the text gives no further identification here.

The phrase "bearing a blue trident" for the final wrathful king renders "beco sngon po can," where beco is a standard Tibetan transliteration of Sanskrit triśūla (trident). The association with Amoghasiddhi and the blue trident points toward a northern-direction wrathful deity.

The mantra passages are rendered in reconstructed Sanskrit as they appear; some syllables are ritual seed-syllables without semantic content and are left as found.  The mantra syllables throughout this passage are transliterated from Tibetan phonetic renderings of Sanskrit dhāraṇī syllables. Some forms are archaic or intentionally corrupt dhāraṇī Sanskrit, and a number of terms such as ASTHI MIDAṂ ASE, RUDHIRA MAJJHA MIDAṂ, and VIŚVA MAJJHA are formulaic references to bones, blood, and marrow as targets of wrathful action. The phrase VIDYĀNĀM ŚĪRṢṬAKA is genuinely uncertain and may mean "head" or "crown" of the vidyā-mantras, indicating supremacy; it is not smoothed over in the transliteration. The verse passage about heavy and light rain likely refers to the wrathful deity's power to cut off or release rainfall according to need.  The passage "གཙོ་བོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་སྣང་མཛད་དྲན" and "གཙོ་བོ་རྣམ་པར་སྣང་མཛད་ཉིད" use two slightly different forms of Vairocana's epithet. Both are rendered as "Vajra Vairocana" and "Vairocana" respectively to reflect the slight variation while maintaining consistency.

The term "གནོད་མཛེས" rendered as "Sundarakāya" is a vidyā-king name meaning "Beautifully Harming" or possibly "Handsome One who Harms." The rendering follows a nominal interpretation of the compound as a proper name for the great vidyā-king in this ritual context.

The line "གསལ་ཤིང་གིས་ནི་བསྒྱེལ་ནས་སུ" rendered as "knocking them down with a torch" — the term "གསལ་ཤིང" can mean a torch or illuminating implement; the exact referent in this ritual context is somewhat ambiguous.  The passage contains a sequence of ritual injunctions describing violent or transgressive rites involving bodily pollutants used as wrathful weapons. The repeated phrase "even a buddha will certainly be destroyed" is a standard Tantric hyperbole indicating the absolute efficacy of these wrathful practices, not a literal claim about buddhas; the commentarial tradition reads this as meaning even the most powerful being cannot withstand the rite. The translation preserves the literal sense as the text demands it.

The phrase rendered "daughters of the hidden lords" translates a term for secret or hidden feminine powers associated with yakṣas or a class of concealed deities; the exact referent is contextually ambiguous but follows the pattern of the series listing earth-daughters, asura daughters, and nāga queens.

The text ends mid-sentence in the supplied Tibetan; the translation reflects this incomplete state.  The phrase rendered "the interval of the fish" refers to a half-month reckoning in the lunar calendar associated with the fish zodiacal sign; the exact technical referent is somewhat obscure and may relate to a specific astrological period used in tantric ritual timing.

The repeated declaration that "even buddhas will be destroyed" or "suppressed" is a characteristic hyperbolic expression within this class of wrathful-kīla tantric literature, indicating the supreme potency of the rite rather than a literal ontological claim about buddhas being harmed. The doctrinal tradition understands such language as expressing the kīla's power over all appearances without exception.

The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan and are not translated, in keeping with standard tantric convention.  The epithet "Īśvara of the World" renders འཇིག་རྟེན་དབང་ཕྱུག, which is both a standard Tibetan name for Avalokiteśvara (Lokeśvara) and a general term meaning "lord of the world." In this tantric context it functions as an epithet of Avalokiteśvara, and the translation reflects this. The phrase "Vajra of Desire" for འདོད་ཆགས་རྡོ་རྗེ denotes a specific deity or principle of transmuted desire in the vajra family, common in Vajrayāna ritual contexts. The mantra syllables are rendered phonetically as they appear in the Tibetan without emendation, as critical editions of the Sanskrit are unavailable here.  The verse in which the yakṣas and rākṣasas "remembered the Chief, the Vajra Vairocana" and then deliver their pledge-speech presents a minor structural ambiguity: it is possible the pledge-speech begins immediately within the verse rather than as a separate prose statement. The rendering here treats the final two lines as direct speech introducing the pledge, which is the more natural reading in context.

The final sentence of the passage is syntactically incomplete in the Tibetan as given, trailing off with "together with red flowers, red perfume, a torma offering" — this appears to be the beginning of a ritual instruction that continues in the following passage.  The name Hāritī appears here in the mantra vocative and in the verse as "the Snatcher" — the Tibetan reads "Phrogs ma," which is indeed the standard rendering of Hāritī, the yakṣiṇī known as the child-snatcher. This is consistent with Buddhist iconographic tradition.

The phrase "nelu tree" renders "ne'u le" — a plant sometimes identified as Elaeagnus or a related shrub; the precise botanical identification is uncertain but the term is kept as a proper name following Tibetan usage.

The text breaks off mid-sentence at the end of the final mudrā description; this appears to be the natural continuation point for the next passage.  The wrathful deities named here follow standard Vajrayāna iconographic conventions. Yamāntaka is the wrathful emanation who destroys the Lord of Death; Acala (here rendered as "noble Acala") is a major wrathful protector; Hayagrīva is the horse-necked wrathful deity. These identifications are secure from context and name.

The figure rendered "Urging Goddess" translates a name meaning a female deity who incites or urges. The "Incense Elephant" and "Wisdom Pinnacle" are less commonly glossed deities whose identities are clear from their Tibetan epithets but who may not have fixed Sanskrit equivalents universally agreed upon in secondary literature; no uncertainty is introduced into the body text.

"Viśvabhadra" renders Bzang skyong, a name meaning "Guardian of the Good" or "Protector of the Auspicious." Some traditions equate this figure with Samantabhadra or a related deity; the rendering is contextually appropriate.  The term rendered "foot of the fingers" in the Goddess of Rays of Light mudrā describes the base or web of the fingers holding the index finger and thumb — the Tibetan is somewhat compressed and the precise hand configuration is technically obscure; the rendering follows the most natural reading of the grammar.

The term translated as "stamping motion" for the lower mudrā of the Wrathful Vajra reflects a ritual foot-stamp accompanying the gesture, consistent with wrathful rite conventions.

"Phuḍ" is a ritual seed-syllable or ejaculation associated with expelling poison; it is left untranslated as it functions as a mantra sound.  The Tibetan term སངས་རྒྱས་འཁོར་ལོ་ཅན ("the Buddha who possesses a wheel") likely refers to Cakravartī-buddha or may be a specific deity epithet in the ritual context of this tantra; it is rendered literally as "the Buddha Cakrī" since the precise identification depends on the broader text.

The term སྲིན་མོ rendered as Rakṣasī denotes a class of fierce female demon in Sanskrit sources; the Tibetan can also denote a wrathful goddess in tantric contexts.

The passage ends mid-sentence with the conch-shell gesture, indicating the source text continues beyond the portion provided.  The passage contains a Sanskrit dhāraṇī-style mantra rendered phonetically in Tibetan. It is transliterated here as closely as possible to the Tibetan phonetic rendering; the Sanskrit underlying some syllables is partially opaque and may vary across witnesses.

The phrase rendered "the chief Vajravairocana" combines the epithet "chief" with rdo rje rnam par snang mdzad, "Vajravairocana." This is a tantric form combining the vajra epithet with Vairocana.

The verse "with three eyes, accompanied by the goddesses, who tames beings" alludes to the figure of Śiva (three-eyed, accompanied by his consort), here reframed within a Vajrayāna context as a tamed or transformed deity. The doctrinal point is that the passage presents a deliberate overlap or appropriation of Śaiva iconography within the tantric Buddhist framework.

The final verse beginning "one embraces everything with one's arms..." describes a fourfold sequence of mudrā or action associated with the tantric consort, and the translation follows the literal sense; the precise ritual referents are context-dependent.  The mantra in the opening lines is left in Sanskrit transliteration as it appears in the Tibetan; it is a standard offering-cloud mantra appearing across Yoga-tantra literature and does not require translation.

The Tathāgata addressed in the verse "Ratnasambhava" enters the samādhi, but the colophon attributes the verse to "Ratnaketu" rather than "Ratnasambhava." The Tibetan text itself uses both names in close proximity, which is consistent with some traditions that treat these as synonymous epithets for the same buddha of the southern family; this is reflected as-is in the translation without emendation.

The phrase rendered "Supreme above all Supremes of all Tathāgatas" translates a compound used as a superlative honorific for the samādhi's gnosis, indicating it transcends even the rank of teacher among teachers.  The passage is a dense tantric ritual instruction, presenting a compressed sequence of yogic and liturgical practices including self-generation, deity yoga, the three yogas (blessing, examination, completion), mudrā practice, and maṇḍala visualization. Several lines are formulaic and terse to the point of requiring interpretive expansion that I have kept minimal and faithful to the Tibetan syntax.

The phrase rendered "born from the syllable of the Immovable One" refers to the seed-syllable Hūṃ associated with Akṣobhya, the "Immovable" Tathāgata, consistent with the preceding context of that buddha family.

The line rendered "contemplated in half-measure" for "ཕྱེད་བསམས་ཏེ" is genuinely uncertain; it may mean the syllable is visualized as if partially manifested or at half-intensity, but the exact technical meaning is not fully transparent from the Tibetan alone.

The translation ends mid-passage as the Tibetan supplied ends mid-sentence; no concluding line has been invented.  The colophon chapter-closing formula identifies this as chapter seven of the Māyājālatantra, focused on the practice of meditating upon bodhicitta as a means of accomplishing wisdom. The designation "Vajra Tathāgata" applied to Vairocana in the prose section that opens the new chapter is a distinctive tantric epithet.

The term rendered "Hermit Lady" translates a feminine form implying a female ascetic or mountain-dwelling practitioner. The exact identity and standard iconographic name of this figure is not definitively settled in the secondary literature and may vary by commentary tradition.

The passage ends mid-sentence with "The wrathful-browed goddess Māmakī —" as the source text breaks off at that point; the continuation belongs to the next passage.  The phrase rendered "posona plant" translates po son, likely a specific plant with thorns used in hostile rites; the identification is uncertain but the ritual context is clear.

The line translated "this is the armor of the fierce conduct of the outer" introduces a structural division between outer and inner practices of the wrathful rite; the term translated as "armor" could also mean "garment" or "protection" in the sense of the outer manifestation or aspect.

The mantra line is reproduced in transliteration as it appears and functions as a ritual dhāraṇī insert within the verse; it is not translated.  The mantra syllables OṂ SUMBHA VAJRA MUŚLEN CŪRṆAYA NARA BHIGHĀN HŪṂ PHAṬ and OṂ VAJRA NĀRĀYAṆA NIRABĀYA MAHINA BAMA MUME GE HŪṂ are transliterated from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit; the Sanskrit reconstruction is approximate and variant readings are possible.

The phrase rendered "the lord of the assembly" for ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ may refer to Gaṇapati (Gaṇeśa), who is frequently the target of subjugation rites of this type in tantric ritual manuals; this reading is contextually plausible but not certain from the Tibetan alone.

The passage ending with རིན་ཆེན་ཅོད་པན་དབང་བསྐུར་བས is grammatically incomplete and breaks off mid-description, indicating this is a continuation that ends in the middle of a sentence. The translation reflects this as it stands.  The passage shifts from a mantra-string into a doctrinal verse discourse that is formally spoken by Vairocana in answer to Vajrapāṇi's question, though the text's framing slides fluidly between narrative and first-person proclamation. The identities of the five Tathāgatas are given in the Tibetan as Vairocana, Akṣobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi; Ratnasambhava is indicated by the epithet "the Jewel" (Rin chen). The phrase "sixteen forms good in all aspects" refers to the sixteen bodhisattvas of the Vajradhātu maṇḍala. The final sentence is syntactically incomplete in the Tibetan, broken off mid-clause, and has been rendered accordingly without invented completion.  The passage describes coercive tantric ritual, including the subjugation of buddhas through effigy-striking. This is a technical feature of certain Vajrayāna kriyā and yoga tantra ritual cycles, and the phrase "even a buddha is certainly subdued" refers to the ritual summoning and binding of a deity's wisdom presence, not a literal doctrinal claim about overcoming a buddha.

The figure praised at the end of this passage — described as holding sword, hammer, spear, and lasso, with limitless faces, a thousand hands, and a thousand eyes — is a fierce goddess whose identity is signaled by the mantra of Cundā (or Cundi), a well-known Tathāgata-blessed deity of the Vajrayāna. The epithets here closely parallel descriptions of Cundā in other tantric sources.

The phrase rendered "rolls its eyes" translates a term literally meaning the image's eyes become as if filled with distortion or twitching, a sign of successful ritual activation of the effigy.  The passage contains an extended dhāraṇī mantra sequence followed by ritual instructions of a distinctly tantric character, mixing Sanskrit mantra syllables and Tibetan explanatory matter. The syllable BREṂ (brem) and PHREṂ (phrem) are seed syllables specific to this ritual context and are left untranslated as is conventional.

The phrase rendered "the vehicle known as BA" translates the Tibetan "ba zhes bya ba'i theg pa." This is genuinely obscure. The single syllable ba as a vehicle name does not correspond to any standard Mahāyāna or Vajrayāna vehicle classification and may be a corrupt or abbreviated technical term; readers should be aware this phrase remains unclear.

The instruction about "two bowls joined at the rim" describes a common tantric ritual implement in which two hemispherical vessels are fitted together to enclose a ritual object, a well-attested practice in Indian and Tibetan tantra.  The passage contains an embedded mantra in transliterated Sanskrit: "Oṃ agāye dīvya dīvya āveśa mahāśriye havya kavya vahānāya svāhā." This is a fire-deity invocation mantra; "havya kavya" refers to the two classes of fire oblation — havya being offerings to the gods and kavya to the ancestors. The rendering follows the Tibetan phonetic transcription as closely as possible.

The final lines break off mid-sentence in the source, indicating the passage is incomplete at this point; this is preserved as-is.  The passage contains a listing of five buddha bodies residing in the elements of the human body: Vairocana in flesh, an unnamed figure (likely Ratnasambhava, the Jewel-Born) in blood, Amitābha in bone, and Amoghasiddhi in the channels. The immovable king at the feet is likely Akṣobhya. This reflects a standard Vajrayāna body-maṇḍala schema, though the Tibetan here is slightly elliptical in naming Akṣobhya directly; I have rendered the passage literally while noting the identification.

The final line is syntactically incomplete in the Tibetan as presented, ending mid-verse. The translation preserves this open ending faithfully.  The passage belongs to the Vajrayāna (tantric) ritual and sādhana literature, describing the practices of the five buddha families and their associated consorts, implements, and siddhi accomplishments. Several figures require brief identification: Māmakī is the consort of Vajradhara and the Akṣobhya family; Ratnā Tārā (rendered from "Ratnasaṃjñā" or a Ratna-family Tārā) is associated with the Ratnasambhava family; the "White-Clad Lady" is Pāṇḍaravāsinī, the consort of Amitābha; Ratnasambhava is the jewel-family buddha.

The section describing the "wide-eyed girl of sixteen" and the subsequent union practice is a technical description of the tantric karmamudra (action seal) practice, a genuine and standard feature of higher yoga tantra texts. The term rendered "passionate attachment" translates Tibetan rjes su chags pa, indicating here not ordinary afflictive desire but the transformed gnosis-desire of tantric practice; this distinction is significant doctrinally but has been left to context rather than forcing an intrusive gloss.  The fivefold identification of the goddesses with the elements follows a standard Vajrayāna schema: earth as the eye or as Locanā in some recensions, but here the text explicitly assigns the eye to earth and names the remaining four (Māmakī to water, Tārā to wind, Pāṇḍaravāsinī to fire, and the expanse of space to the vajra pledge itself). The rendering "eye" for "sa ni spyan du brjod pa" follows the literal Tibetan rather than any parallel system, and this is noted because the identification is somewhat unusual and may reflect a distinctive recension.

The statement that the merit of a single pore of the vajra ācārya surpasses the combined merit of all buddhas in the ten directions is a hyperbolically strong claim serving to underscore the supreme status of the role of ācārya who embodies bodhicitta; it is not a doctrinal error but a rhetorical elevation characteristic of this genre of tantra.  The verse reference to "the meaning of the forty" is a technical tantra-internal enumeration whose precise referent varies by commentarial tradition; most likely it refers to the forty subsidiary topics or conceptual objects associated with the maṇḍala or tantric ritual system being taught. This is left unglossed in the body as the text itself does not specify.

The phrase rendered "employing wisdom and primordial gnosis" translates a compound that in tantric context typically refers to the union of prajñā (feminine, wisdom) and jñāna (gnosis), a standard Vajrayāna dyad; this reading is consistent with the surrounding ritual context.  The closing colophon identifies the translator as Rinchen Zangpo, the famous Tibetan lotsāwa (958–1055 CE), whose name here is given its honorific title "great translator" (zhu chen gyi lotsāba). The phrase "more secret even than the secret" renders a superlative used in tantric literature to indicate the text belongs to the highest register of esoteric teaching. The term "gandharvas" renders dri za, literally "scent-eaters," the class of semi-divine celestial beings standardly included in the assembly formula at a sūtra or tantra's close.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
