The Noble Great Queen of Mantra-Vidyā Who Emerged from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol, Unconquerable, the Averter of All (Ārya-sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatrā-nāma-aparājitā-pratyaṅgirā-mahāvidyārājñī)

Toh 590 in the Kangyur is the Noble Great Queen of Mantra-Vidyā Who Emerged from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol, Unconquerable, the Averter of All, known in Sanskrit as the Ārya-sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatrā-aparājitā-pratyaṅgirā-mahāvidyārājñī, and in Tibetan as the Phakpa Dezhin Shekpa Thamché kyi Tsuktor né jungwa Dukkar Pochen zhéjawa Zhengyi mi tubma Chirzokpé Riksngakma Chenmo. It is a dhāraṇī sūtra belonging to the Tantra section of the Kangyur, centering on the powerful and protective spell that radiates from the uṣṇīṣa — the crown protrusion — of all the buddhas, personified as a goddess bearing a white parasol and renowned for her capacity to avert all harm and liberate beings from lower rebirths. The text takes the form of a canonical discourse delivered by the Buddha while dwelling among the Gods of the Thirty-Three, where he enters a special meditative absorption and from his uṣṇīṣa emanates the great mantra-vidyā at the heart of the teaching. The Sitātapatrā tradition became one of the most widely venerated dhāraṇī cycles across the Buddhist world, prized for its purificatory and protective power.

In the language of India: Ārya-sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatrā-nāma-aparājitā-pratyaṅgirā-mahāvidyārājñī. In the language of Tibet: The Noble Great Queen of Mantra-Vidyā Who Emerged from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol, Unconquerable, the Averter of All.

Homage to the Three Jewels. Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Thus did I hear. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling in the divine realm of the Gods of the Thirty-Three (Skt. trāyastriṃśa), in the assembly hall of the god Sudharmā, together with a great Saṅgha of monks, a great Saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and with Śakra (Indra), lord of the gods. There the Blessed One, seated upon a prepared throne, entered into the meditative absorption (samādhi) called Viewing the Uṣṇīṣa. The very moment he entered that absorption, from the midst of the Blessed One's uṣṇīṣa there arose these words of secret mantra:

Namo bhagavate uṣṇīṣāya śuddhe viraje vimale svāhā.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Unobstructed Uṣṇīṣa. Homage to the Buddha. Homage to the Dharma. Homage to the Saṅgha. Homage to the seventy million perfectly and completely awakened buddhas. Homage to Maitreya and all the other buddhas and bodhisattvas together with the Saṅgha of hearers. Homage to the arhats of this world. Homage to the stream-enterers (Skt. srotāpanna). Homage to the once-returners (Skt. sakṛdāgāmin). Homage to the non-returners (Skt. anāgāmin). Homage to those who have rightly gone forth in this world. Homage to those who have properly entered. Homage to the divine sages. Homage to the sages accomplished in the bearing of mantra-vidyā. Homage to those accomplished sages who bear mantra-vidyā and who, wielding the weapon of the curse, are capable of conferring benefit through their curses.

Homage to Brahmā. Homage to Indra. Homage to the Blessed One Śiva (Skt. Bhadra Rudra), master of severe austerities, the averter, together with his retinue. Homage to Varuṇa, the god of waters. Homage to the Blessed One Śiva, son of Nārāyaṇa, who has been saluted with the five great mudrās. Homage to the Blessed One Śiva, the Gladdener, the great black lord of power, the destroyer of the triple city, who dwells in the great charnel ground of Kāśmīra, together with the host of mothers who worship him.

Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the Tathāgata. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the lotus. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the vajra. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the jewel. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the king. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of karma. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the precious gem. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the youth. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of the elephant. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of delusion. Homage to the Blessed One's relic of attachment.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, King of Weapons of the Steadfast Army. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Amitābha. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Akṣobhya. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Vajradhara, the Conqueror of the Ocean. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the Master of Medicine, the King of Beryl Light, Bhaiṣajyaguru Vaiḍūryaprabha.

Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Amoghasiddhi. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the King of the Lord of Śāla Trees, Flowers Greatly Spread. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the King of Supreme Lotus. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Viśvadṛk. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the One Bearing the Uṣṇīṣa. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Protector of All. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Remover of Wrong Faith. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Suvarṇamuni. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Kāśyapa. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Śākyamuni. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Precious Moon. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the King of the Jeweled Topknot. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Samantabhadra. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, Vairocana. Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly and completely awakened buddha, the King of the Blooming Lotus and the Fragrant Crown of the Utpala.

Having paid homage to all of these, one should now recite aloud this queen of vidyā-mantras (Skt. vidyārājñī) called the Great White Parasol Arisen from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas — Uṣṇīṣasitātapatrā — the Invincible One Who Turns All Back. She who utterly pacifies all conflict, strife, quarrel, and discord. She who repels all spirits and demonic afflictions. She who cuts through all the vidyā-mantras of adversaries. She who completely protects from untimely death. She who liberates all sentient beings who are bound. She who destroys all malice and evil dreams. She who utterly defeats all demonic afflictions of yakṣas and rākṣasas. She who annihilates the eighty-four thousand demonic afflictions. She who perfectly accomplishes the twenty-eight constellations. She who repels all enemies. She who utterly defeats the eight great planetary spirits. She who annihilates ferocity, malice, and evil dreams. She who protects from poison, weapons, fire, and water. She who delivers from all the terrors of the lower destinies. She who completely protects against the eight kinds of untimely death.

Invincible, of great ferocity,
of great power and great majesty,
of great fierceness, greatly white,
of great brilliance and great power,
greatly blazing, garlanded greatly,
greatly robed in white —
noble Tārā, the Frowning One,
renowned as the Vajra-Garland of the Victors,
with the light of the lotus as her vajra-mark,
garlanded with the invincible,
vajra-lipped, bearing scattered flames,
worshiped by the peaceful deities,
of peaceful form, greatly white,
blazing and robed in white,
noble Tārā, greatly powerful,
deathless vajra rosary,
vidyādharī (holder of the vidyā) who is the Vajra Youth,
the vajra of the vajra-bearing Vajrapāṇi,
and likewise the vidyā-mantra bearing a golden garland.

the Jewel Lady of aged resins,
the light of the lineage of Vairocana,
the uṣṇīṣa (crown protrusion) of the Tathāgata lineage,
the garland of the Thoroughly Arrayed,
with eyes like the golden light of the vajra,
vajra-robed, the white one,
the glorious Lotus-Eyed, the Buddha-Eyed,
and likewise the Vajra-Moon Light,
and likewise the Vajra-Holding One,
the goddess of the great illusion Vajra-Garland,
and the golden-rayed one,
the Beautiful-Eyed, the white one,
the Lotus-Eyed,
the fully tamed, peacefully minded,
and Moon-Light who knows my qualities —
all of these assembled mudrās,
together with the assembled māmakīs (mother-goddesses), I beseech you all to protect me, together with my retinue, and all sentient beings.

Oṃ ṛṣigaṇapraśāsta sarvatathagatoṣṇīṣa sitātapatre hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Jambhani hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Stambhani hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Mohanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Paribidyāsambhakṣaṇakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Sarvavidyāchedanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Sarvaduṣṭānāṃ stambhanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Sarvayakṣarākṣasagrahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṃ hrūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Caturāśītīnāṃ grahasahasrāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Aṣṭāviṃśatīnāṃ nakṣatrāṇāṃ prasādanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Aṣṭānāṃ mahāgrahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ. Rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarvāsattvāṃśca.

The Blessed Lady, the Great White Parasol who arose from the uṣṇīṣas of all the Tathāgatas, the Vajra-Uṣṇīṣa, the Great Repeller, the Great One possessed of a thousand hands, the Great One possessed of a thousand heads, the Great One possessed of a hundred million eyes, bearing signs and marks of unceasing blazing fire, sovereign through the great vastness of the vajra over the maṇḍalas of the three planes of existence — Oṃ, I beseech you to bring wellbeing to me and to all sentient beings. From the fear of kings, the fear of thieves, the fear of fire, the fear of water, the fear of poison, the fear of weapons, the fear of enemies, the fear of enemy armies, the fear of famine, the fear of enemies, the fear of lightning, the fear of untimely death, the fear of earthquakes, the fear of falling meteors, the fear of royal punishment, the fear of fierce wild beasts, the fear of nāgas, the fear of lightning bolts, the fear of scorching sand, the fear of garuḍas (celestial eagle-beings), from epidemic disease, from harm, from contagious disease, and from the fear of all conflicts; from the fear of possessing spirits, and from possession by gods, possession by nāgas, possession by yakṣas, possession by rākṣasas (flesh-eating demons), possession by gandharvas (celestial musicians), possession by asuras, possession by garuḍas, possession by wind-gods, possession by kiṃnaras (half-human beings), possession by great serpents, possession by human spirits, possession by non-human spirits, possession by bhūtas (elemental spirits), possession by hungry ghosts, possession by flesh-eaters, possession by kumbhāṇḍas (pot-bellied demons), possession by decaying spirits, possession by spirits that cause bodily decay, possession by spirits that cause wasting, possession by spirits that cause madness, possession by spirits that create shadow-oppression, possession by spirits that cause forgetfulness, possession by oppressive spirits, possession by ḍākinīs, possession by spirits of bodily attachment, possession by corner-spirits, possession by spirits that draw out thorns, possession by spirits that draw out splinters, possession by bird-spirits, possession by spirits that delight māmakīs, possession by spirits that cause universal proliferation, possession by hanging spirits, possession by ḍākinīs,

possession by ḍākinīs of the body, possession by spirits of the Kaṭaṅkaṭa host, and all possessing spirits — those that steal vitality, those that devour the womb, those that drink blood, those that eat fat, those that eat flesh, those that eat grease, those that eat feet, those that eat what has been born, those that steal life, those that eat torma offerings, those that eat garlands, those that eat fragrance, those that eat flowers, those that eat incense, those that eat fruit, those that eat harvests, those that eat burnt offerings, those that drink pus, those that eat excrement, those that drink urine, those that eat saliva, those that eat mucus, those that eat fresh mucus, those that eat vomit, those that eat fatty morsels, those that eat filth, those that drink what flows down from orifices, those that steal wealth, and those that steal the mind — all of these, and all possessing spirits: every mantra made by them is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made through universal transmission is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by ḍākas and ḍākinīs is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by Brahmā is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by Śakra (Indra) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the Son of No-Craving (Nairṛti) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the Great Lord of Cattle and by the Fierce One (Rudra) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the Great Black One (Mahākāla) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the assembly of Mātṛs is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the one who bears a human skull is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the forest-dweller is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the zombie (vetāla) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the meteor-faced one is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by Vajrakumārī is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by Yamāntaka is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the messengers of Yama is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by malevolent nāgas is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made through the rite of fire is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by misleading spirits is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by youths is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the Four Great Kings is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the four sisters is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the true Garuḍa (Skt. garuḍa) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by the Victorious One, the Honey-Maker, the Accomplisher, and the Fulfiller of All Aims is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made together with Bhṛṅgiriṭi, the Joy-Maker (Nandīśvara), the Son of the Pleiades (Kārttikeya), the Moon, the Sun, the Lord of the Assembly, and their companions is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by naked ascetics is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by arhats is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by Avalokiteśvara is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by one free from attachment is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla.

Every mantra made by Vajrapāṇi, the Lord of Secrets, is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made anywhere and by anyone is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by one who was caused to perform it is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by a śramaṇa who touches heads is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by male messengers and female messengers, by male servants and female servants, is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by all the foremost seers (ṛṣis) is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by all the assemblies of gods is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla. Every mantra made by all those who wish to cause harm is cut down by the sword and struck by the vajra-kīla.

Oṃ. Blessed Lady, please protect me together with my retinue, and all sentient beings, from all fears, from harm, from contagious disease, from all conflict, from all hatred and extreme hatred, from all adversaries, enemies, and those who wish to cause harm — protect us, protect us. To you who arose from the crown protrusion of all the Tathāgatas, who bear the white parasol, who are venerated by all buddhas and bodhisattvas, who are luminous and white and vast like fire and the sun — to you I pay homage.

Oṃ jvala jvala, dhaka dhaka, khāda khāda, dara dara, vidara vidara, chinda chinda, bhinda bhinda, hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā. Sarva duṣṭān hūṃ drūṃ. Sarva durghatebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva duśchāyebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva durlikhitebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva digbhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva durbhuktebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva dutebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva avaṅghutebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva duṣitebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva duḥprekṣitebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva jvarebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva apasmārebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva oṃstārakebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva ḍākinībhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva revatībhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva kaṭavāsinībhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva jāmakebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva śakunībhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva mātṛnandikebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva garebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva viṣebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva yogebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva ālambekebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva bhayebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarvopadravebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarvopasar gopāyasebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva utrāsebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva vyādhibhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva śramaṇebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva grahebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva tīrthikebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva pratitīrthikebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva pātakebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva unmādebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva chāyebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva vidyādharebhyaḥ phaṭ. Jayakara madhukara siddhikara sarva arthasādhakebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva vidyācāryebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva vidyārājebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva sādhakebhyo vidyācāryebhyaḥ phaṭ. Caturbhyo bhaginībhyaḥ phaṭ. Vajrakaumāri ye vidyārājñiye phaṭ. Sarva vighnaṃ vināyakānāṃ phaṭ. Varadāya phaṭ. Para vidrāvaṇakarāya phaṭ. Sarva asurebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva garuḍebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva mahoragabhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva mānuṣyāmānuṣyebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva mārutebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva piśācebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva kumbhāṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ. Vajriśṛṅkhalāya nānta pratyagrābhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarvopasar gebhyaḥ phaṭ. Mahā pratyaḍhirebhyaḥ phaṭ. Chinda chinda phaṭ. Bhinda bhinda phaṭ. Hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. He he phaṭ. Ho ho phaṭ. Amoghāya phaṭ. Apratihatāya phaṭ. Varapradāya phaṭ. Asura vidrāvaṇakarāya phaṭ. Sarva devebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva nāgebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva yakṣebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva rākṣasebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva gandharvebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva kinnarebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva pretebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva bhūtebhyaḥ phaṭ.

Sarva kumbhāṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva pūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva kaṭapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva skandebhyaḥ phaṭ. Sarva unmādebhyaḥ phaṭ. Vajraśaṃkalāya mahāpratyaṃgirārājāya phaṭ. Kālāya phaṭ. Mahākālāya phaṭ. Mātṛgaṇāya phaṭ. Mahāmātṛgaṇanāmaskṛtāya phaṭ. Vaiṣṇavīye phaṭ. Maheśvārīye phaṭ. Brāhmaṇīye phaṭ. Agnīye phaṭ. Mahākālīye phaṭ. Kāladaṇḍīye phaṭ. Indrīye phaṭ. Raudrīye phaṭ. Cāmuṇḍīye phaṭ. Vārāhīye phaṭ. Mahāvārāhīye phaṭ. Rātrīye phaṭ. Kālarātrīye phaṭ. Yamadaṇḍīye phaṭ. Kapālīye phaṭ. Mahākapālīye phaṭ. Kaumārīye phaṭ. Yāmīye phaṭ. Vāyave phaṭ. Kuverāye phaṭ. Nairṛtīye phaṭ. Vāruṇīye phaṭ. Mārutīye phaṭ. Mahāmārutīye phaṭ. Saumye phaṭ. Aiśānīye phaṭ. Paukkasīye phaṭ. Ātharvaṇīye phaṭ. Śabarīye phaṭ. Kṛṣṇaśabarīye phaṭ. Yamadūtīye phaṭ. Nisaṃdivācarebhyaḥ phaṭ. Trisandhyārcebhyaḥ phaṭ. Dharaṇīye phaṭ. Adhimuktikashmīramahāśmaśānavāsinīye phaṭ. Itibhyaḥ. Sarva bhayebhyaḥ. Sarva daṣṭibhyaḥ phaṭ. Oṃ hūṃ ṣṭoṃ bhandha bhandha sarva duṣṭān rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarva sattvāṃśca svāhā.

Those who bear hatred toward me together with my retinue and toward all sentient beings — those possessed of a hateful mind and those possessed of a violent mind and those possessed of a malicious mind and those possessed of a turbulent mind and those possessed of a hostile mind — from all such as these, I pray that you grant protection to me together with my retinue and to all sentient beings. May we live for a hundred years. May we behold a hundred seasons.

To me together with my retinue and to all sentient beings, from all harmful spirits and yakṣas — those that are yakṣa spirits, those that steal vitality, those that devour in the womb, those that drink blood, those that eat fat, those that eat flesh, those that eat grease, those that eat the feet, those that eat the newborn, those that steal life, those that eat torma offerings, those that eat garlands, those that eat fragrances, those that eat flowers, those that eat incense, those that eat fruits, those that eat grain, those that eat burnt offerings, those that steal wealth, those that steal the mind, those that eat pus, those that eat excrement, those that drink urine, those that drink saliva, those that eat mucus, those that eat dry mucus, those that eat vomit, those that eat bile, those that eat impure matter, those that drink what flows from open sores — and those possessed of a malicious mind, those possessed of a hateful mind, those possessed of a violent mind — from the spirits of gods, the spirits of nāgas, the spirits of yakṣas, the spirits of rākṣasas, the spirits of gandharvas, the spirits of asuras, the spirits of garuḍas, the spirits of kinnaras, the spirits of great serpents, the spirits of humans, the spirits of non-humans, the spirits of wind-gods, the spirits of hungry ghosts, the spirits of flesh-eaters, the spirits of elemental beings, the spirits of kumbhāṇḍas, the spirits of the putrid, the spirits of the bodily putrid, the spirits that cause wasting, the spirits that cause madness, the spirits that cause shadow-oppression, the spirits that cause forgetfulness, the spirits that oppress, the spirits of ḍākinīs, the spirits of sky-goers,

the spirits that follow everywhere, the spirits that extract thorns, the spirits of birds, the spirits that delight the Māmō, the spirits like pitchers, the spirits that hang down, the spirits of body-ḍākinīs, the spirits of the assembly of kaṭaṅkaṭa — may all these spirits be dispelled. I pray that all fevers of one day's duration, of two days, of three days, of four days, of seven days, of half a month, of a full month, of daytime onset, of midday onset, of momentary onset — and chronic fevers, unbearable fevers, fevers caused by elemental beings, fevers caused by hungry ghosts, fevers caused by flesh-eaters, fevers caused by humans, fevers caused by non-humans, unceasing fevers, fevers arising from wind, fevers arising from bile, fevers arising from phlegm, fevers arising from their combination, all fevers whatsoever, and headache — may all these be dispelled from me together with my retinue and from all sentient beings. I pray that pain in the side, stiffness of the neck, diseases of the eye, diseases of the nose, diseases of the mouth, diseases of the throat, disease of the heart, pain in the region of the kidneys, pain in the ear, pain in the teeth, pain in the chest, pain in the heart, pain in the vitals, pain in the ribs, pain in the back, pain in the stomach, pain in the waist, pain in the joints, pain in the lower abdomen, pain in the genitals, pain in the secondary generative organs, pain in the thighs, pain in the calves, pain in the hands, pain in the feet, pain in the major limbs, pain in the minor limbs — may all these be dispelled from me together with my retinue and from all sentient beings. I pray that elemental beings, hungry ghosts, reanimated corpses, ḍākinīs, fevers, smallpox, jaundice, goiter, fine rashes, leprosy, fistula, herpes, liver disease, nocturnal swellings, scabies, hemorrhoids, erysipelas, throat inflammation, wasting disease, difficulty breathing, fright, vomiting, fainting, bone-poison, administered poison, poison, sorcery, fire, water, enemies, māras, fighting, enmity, harm, untimely death, the insects traima and buka, trailātaka, sin, snakes, scorpions, lions, tigers, bears, brown bears, wild yaks, crocodiles, wolves, robbers, and all others that steal life — may all of these likewise be dispelled from me together with my retinue and from all sentient beings. By the power of the knowledge-mantra of the great aversion, the Vajra-Uṣṇīṣa of the White Parasol, within a range of twelve yojanas or within a range of five hundred yojanas: I shall bind the knowledge-mantras. I shall bind the splendors. I shall bind all knowledge-mantras. I shall bind all knowledge-mantras of others. I shall sever the boundaries. I shall bind the earth. I shall bind the ten directions. I shall bind the sky. I shall utterly rout the armies of others.

tadyathā oṃ anale anale acale acale khakhame khakhame viṣade viṣade vīre vīre vaira vaira saumye saumye śānte śānte dānte dānte vajradhara bandha bandhani vajrapāṇi phaṭ oṃ hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭhauṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā oṃ vajrapāṇi bandha bandha vajrapāśena sarvaduṣṭavighnavinīyakāna hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ hūṃ drūṃ bandha phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarvasatvāṃś ca svāhā.

Whoever writes this Great Queen of knowledge-mantras — the Invincible Turning-Back, Issued from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol — on birch bark, cloth, or the bark of a tree, and wears it on the body or around the neck, so long as they live poison shall not touch them, weapons shall not touch them, plague shall not touch them, disease shall not touch them, legal penalty shall not touch them, fire shall not touch them, water shall not touch them, no ritual of transformation (sorcery) shall touch them, arrow-poison shall not touch them, compound poisons shall not touch them, harmful spells shall not touch them, and untimely death shall not befall them. They shall become pleasing and delightful to all malevolent spirits, obstructors, and misleaders. They shall recall their births and lineages across eighty-four thousand koṭis of aeons, life after life. Eighty-four thousand koṭi-times-one-hundred-thousand knowledge-mantra deities of the Vajra family shall continuously, without interruption, abide in equipoise and shall constantly protect, guard, and shelter that person. Eighty-four thousand vajra messenger-envoys shall also constantly watch over them, and all of those shall find that person pleasing and delightful. Never shall they become a yakṣa, a rākṣasa, a sprite, a hungry ghost, a flesh-eater, a preta, a corpse-spirit, a human pauper. They shall come to possess a mass of merit equal to that of innumerable, immeasurable buddha Blessed Ones as many as the grains of sand in the Ganges River.

If one bears this Great Queen of knowledge-mantras — the Invincible Turning-Back, Issued from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol — one who has not kept the holy life shall become as one who has kept the holy life. One who has not practiced austerity shall become as one who has. One who is impure shall become as one who is pure. One who has not kept the eight precepts of the restoration fast shall become as one who has. Even one who has committed the five acts of immediate retribution shall be purified of all that evil without remainder. All karmic obscurations from past actions shall be exhausted entirely without remainder.

Any woman who bears this Great Queen of knowledge-mantras — the Great Invincible Turning-Back, Issued from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol — if she desires a child, she shall obtain a child; and she shall be abundantly endowed with long life, merit, and strength. After dying and passing from here she shall be born in the world-realm of Bliss (Sukhāvatī), and shall become utterly free from attachment, aversion, delusion, pride, and all arrogance.

If anyone is afflicted by disease among human beings, disease among cattle, smallpox, plague, harm, contagious illness, all manner of conflict, and the coming of enemy armies — let them affix this Great Queen of knowledge-mantras, the Invincible Turning-Back, Issued from the Uṣṇīṣa of All the Tathāgatas, Bearing the White Parasol — of the Blessed One, the perfectly and fully awakened buddha Ajita — to the top of a victory banner, perform grand worship with great ceremony, and erect it at the gates of all cities, at temples, in villages, in towns, in regions, in hamlets, in charnel grounds, on mountains, or in hermitage-dwellings. Through the mere erection of this Great Queen of knowledge-mantras, the Great Invincible Turning-Back, performed with grand ceremony, warfare shall be pacified. Plague, harm, contagious illness, all conflict, and enemy armies shall be thoroughly pacified. The nāga king Ananta and

the nāga king Dungkyong, the nāga king Great Black, the nāga king Joyful, and Near-Joyful — and indeed all other nāga kings as well — shall send down rain in due season, shall produce lightning in due season, shall send forth thunder in due season, and all illness and harm shall be thoroughly pacified.

Oṃ hūṃ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha sarva duṣṭāna rakṣa mama sa parivārasya sarva satvāṃśca svāhā. Oṃ hūṃ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha sarva duṣṭān rakṣa rakṣa mama sa parivārasya sarva satvāṃśca vajrapāṇi hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. Oṃ sarva tathāgatoṣṇīṣa avalokite mūrdhani tejo rāśi. Oṃ jvala jvala. Khāda khāda. Dhaka dhaka. Dara dara. Vidara vidara. Chinda chinda. Bhinda bhinda. Hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa mama sa parivārasya sarva satvāṃśca svāhā. Oṃ sarva tathāgatoṣṇīṣa sitātapatre hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. Hūṃ hūṃ rakṣa rakṣa mama sa parivārasya sarva satvāṃśca hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. Tadyathā. Oṃ anale anale. Acale acale. Khaṣame khaṣame. Vīre vīre. Vaira vaira. Saumye saumye. Sarva buddha adhiṣṭhāna adhiṣṭhite sarva tathāgatoṣṇīṣa sitātapatre sarva duṣṭa cittān hūṃ phaṭ svāhā.

All of the foregoing is to be recited three times, in the yoga of the buddhas.

When the Blessed One had thus declared this, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, the gods, humans, asuras (demigods), garuḍas, kinnaras, and gandharvas together with all the world rejoiced, and they greatly praised what the Blessed One had proclaimed.

The noble Great Queen of knowledge-mantras, the Great Invincible Turning-Back, the White Parasol Arisen from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas, is complete.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The passage renders several epithets of Śiva under different Tibetan phrasings. The first, "legs ldan drag po dka' thub zlog ma'i bdag po," corresponds to Bhadra Rudra, lord of austerities; the second, "legs ldan sred med kyi bu," literally "the Blessed One, son of Nārāyaṇa," is a recognized epithet of Śiva; the third, "legs ldan dga' byed dbang phyug nag po chen po," is Mahānanda Maheśvara Kālī, the great black lord. These three are understood in the commentarial tradition as distinct honorific addresses to forms of Śiva within the context of a comprehensive homage section.

The "relics" listed (gdung) present a well-known interpretive difficulty: terms such as "relic of delusion" and "relic of attachment" are unusual and likely refer to symbolic or tantric categories of stūpa-relics rather than physical bone relics, though this text's commentarial tradition has not been specified here.

The phrase "Vajradhara, Conqueror of the Ocean" renders rdo rje 'dzin pa rgya mtsho 'joms pa; "ocean" here may refer to the ocean of existence or saṃsāra.  The buddha names in this homage series are Tibetan renderings of Sanskrit epithets. "Amoghasiddhi" renders དོན་ཡོད་གྲུབ་པ directly and is the standard identification. "Viśvadṛk" renders རྣམ་པར་གཟིགས, meaning "the All-Seeing." "Suvarṇamuni" renders གསེར་ཐུབ, "Golden Sage." "Kāśyapa" renders འོད་སྲུང, his standard Tibetan equivalent. "Remover of Wrong Faith" and "Protector of All" are descriptive epithets without fixed Sanskrit equivalents attested in this list; they are rendered literally. The verse section beginning with "Invincible, of great ferocity" introduces a series of epithets applied to the Uṣṇīṣasitātapatrā deity herself; the epithets "noble Tārā, the Frowning One" and "Vajra Youth" appear here as alternate or associated manifestation-names within the dhāraṇī's liturgical context, which is consistent with the syncretic character of this text.  The term རེ་ལྡེ is uncertain; it likely refers to splinter-like intrusions, possibly bone fragments or thorns in a medical-demonic context, and I have rendered it as "splinters" by analogy with the paired preceding term ཚེར་མ ("thorns"). The list of possessing spirits here follows a well-attested genre in Indic and Tibetan ritual literature; the compound terms are rendered as transparently as the Tibetan allows, with Sanskrit equivalents supplied where standard. The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear and represent the standard Sitātapatrā dhāraṇī sequence; they are not translated as they function as ritual speech-acts.  The phrase "Son of No-Craving" renders the Tibetan Sred med kyi bu, a name for Nairṛti, the lord of the south-west direction in the Indian cosmological system; the name literally means "son of she who has no craving," corresponding to the Sanskrit Nirṛti.

The "Great Lord of Cattle" and "the Fierce One" in conjunction likely refer to Śiva in his aspects as Paśupati and Rudra respectively; the Tibetan keeps them as two epithets joined by a connective, and they are rendered accordingly.

The list of mantras to be destroyed by the sword and vajra-kīla is a standard apotropaic formula found in Vajrakīla literature; its inclusion of divine figures such as Brahmā, Indra, Avalokiteśvara, and arhats is doctrinally significant, indicating that the power of Vajrakīla supersedes all other sources of mantra power, including ostensibly positive ones — a point the commentarial tradition addresses by noting that here "mantra" refers specifically to hostile or binding spells attributed to those figures by practitioners of black rites.  The phrase rendered "a śramaṇa who touches heads" translates dgge sbyong mgo reg gis, referring to a type of diviner or sorcerer who practices by physical contact with the head of a subject; this is a specific technical usage within the demonological context of this dhāraṇī text.

The mantra syllables are transliterated directly from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit. Some reconstructed Sanskrit forms, particularly "sarvopasar gopāyasebhyaḥ" and "vajriśṛṅkhalāya nānta pratyagrābhyaḥ," are uncertain due to evident scribal corruption or unusual compound forms in the Tibetan phonetic transcription; the transliterations above reflect the closest plausible Sanskrit reconstruction.  The long catalogue of spirit-types in the second half is a standard dhāraṇī enumeration. Several terms name specific classes of harmful supernatural beings well known in the Indo-Tibetan tradition: pūtana and kaṭapūtana are foul-smelling spirits associated with childhood illness; skanda is a spirit causing childhood fever and seizures; unmāda refers to spirits causing madness; kumbhāṇḍa are gourd-bellied demons. The feminine deity names in the mantra section — Vaiṣṇavī, Maheśvarī, Brāhmaṇī, Cāmuṇḍī, Vārāhī, Kaumārī, and so forth — are the well-known group of mother-goddesses (mātṛkās) of the Śaiva-Śākta pantheon, here subjected to the dhāraṇī's power. The final Tibetan section opens a prose protection prayer that continues into the spirit-catalogue; the passage ends mid-list, consistent with a longer continuous text.  The term rendered "spirits like pitchers" refers to a class of malevolent spirits whose Sanskrit equivalent is uncertain in this context; the Tibetan literally means "spirits resembling a pot or vase."

The phrase "pain in the region of the kidneys" renders a Tibetan term literally meaning "the upper part of the kidneys or diaphragm area," which in traditional medical usage could indicate the upper lumbar or sub-diaphragmatic region rather than the kidneys themselves; the precise anatomical referent is contextually ambiguous.

"Bone-poison" is a rendering of a Tibetan compound that may refer either to a specific toxic substance that affects bones or to a named class of magical poison; the exact reference is uncertain.

The insect names traima, buka, and trailātaka are transliterated from the Tibetan phonetic rendering of what are likely Sanskrit terms for specific harmful insects or creatures; their precise identification is unknown.  The epithet "Ajita" (meaning "Invincible" or "Unconquered") applied here to the Blessed One is the same Sanskrit term that underlies the Tibetan "mi pham pa." It is one of the standard epithets of the Buddha and should not be confused with the bodhisattva Maitreya, who also bears the name Ajita in some traditions.

The term "སྲུལ་པོ" and "ལུས་སྲུལ་པོ" rendered here as "preta" and "corpse-spirit" respectively represent a challenging pair. The first likely refers to a preta of a particular decayed or putrid type, the second to a reanimated or decaying body-spirit. The rendering is approximate; the precise distinction between these two categories varies across sources.  The nāga king names in the opening — Dungkyong (literally "Conch-Keeper") and the others — are rendered from the Tibetan as they appear; the Sanskrit equivalents underlying Dungkyong and Near-Joyful (Nyedgabo) are not reconstructed with certainty here and so no Sanskrit forms are supplied.

The mantra syllables are transcribed in standard romanized Sanskrit as they appear phonetically in the Tibetan; they are not translated, as is correct for dhāraṇī passages.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
