The Noble Mañjuśrī in His Youthful Form — The One Hundred and Eight Names Together with Dhāraṇī and Mantra (Āryamañjuśrīkumārabhūtāṣṭottaraśataka-nāma-dhāraṇī-mantra-sahita)

Toh 639 in the Kangyur is a dhāraṇī text known in English as "The One Hundred and Eight Names of the Noble Mañjuśrī in His Youthful Form, Together with Dhāraṇī and Mantra," corresponding to the Sanskrit title Āryamañjuśrīkumārabhūtāṣṭottaraśataka-nāma-dhāraṇī-mantra-sahita and the Tibetan 'Phags pa 'Jam dpal gzhon nur gyur pa'i mtshan brgya rtsa brgyad pa gzungs sngags dang bcas pa. The text belongs to the dhāraṇī section of the Kangyur and combines a litany of one hundred and eight names of the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī — revered in his youthful, princely aspect — with accompanying dhāraṇī and mantra formulas. Mañjuśrī is one of the most celebrated bodhisattvas in the Mahāyāna tradition, embodying wisdom, and texts of this type were recited for the merit and blessings believed to arise from invoking and venerating his names and sacred syllables. The opening homages to the buddhas of the ten directions and to Mañjuśrī himself set a devotional tone characteristic of this genre of liturgical and ritual literature.

The One Hundred and Eight Names with Dhāraṇī and Mantra is complete.

In the language of India: Āryamañjuśrīkumārabhūtāṣṭottaraśataka-nāma-dhāraṇī-mantra-sahita.

In the language of Tibet: The Noble Mañjuśrī in His Youthful Form — The One Hundred and Eight Names Together with Dhāraṇī and Mantra.

Homage to the perfectly awakened buddhas of the ten directions, who possess utterly pure intelligence, encompassing without exception all that is to be known, supremely wondrous beyond compare.

Homage to Mañjuśrī in his youthful form, whose mind is free from all stains and faults, whose body is adorned with the rays of light of a collection of immaculate virtues, and at whose lotus feet — upon which he rests — gods, humans, asuras, nāgas, and vidyādhara mantra-holders press the crests of their topknots and the tips of their crowns.

Homage to the great bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa, who utterly vanquishes the manifold migrations of the lower destinies.

Thus it is: Oṃ bho mahāmaṇi rucira kalāpa vicitra muktadāma alaṃkṛta śarīra paramasattva mocaka tathāgata mahādharma koṣadhara pravara dharmalabdha vijaya surata saṃbhoga upadeśaka kleśagara praśamaka śūnyatā svabhāva anusvarim mahābodhisattva vara barta varaṇadada oṃ mahāpāśa prasara asama sama anantasama samantabhadra samantsandhara samantākara samantaprasara sarasara he he mañjurava mahāvajra mahākhaḍga chinda chinda bhinda bhinda virja virja karma avagamaka kuru kuru dhuru dhuru suru suru muru muru dha dha dha dha dhu dhu dhu dhu mahā mahā mahā mahā mohaya mohaya bho bho bhīma bhīma nāda nāda sara sara mahābodhisattva mocaya mama nātham anusṛta apāya duḥkhaṃ sukhaṃ mahākāruṇikā anātho haṃ duḥkhito haṃ sarajo haṃ upadruто haṃ avivikto haṃ māraṇadharmo haṃ tvanabhagavāṃ duḥkhitānāṃ sukhaṃ dadā anāthānāṃ sanāthakara sarajasāṃ virajaskara upadruhānāṃ svara upadravaпraśamaka aviviktatānāṃ kuśala saṃbhara paripūrayitā kusīdhānāṃ mahāvīrya dhatā māraṇa dharmī ṇa mamati padādātā mama vibhagavān nāthobhava śaraṇaṃ parāyaṇaṃ trātā sarvaduḥkhāni me praśamaya sarvaśleśarājīṃsi me avanamaya sarvasaṃsāra upadrava duḥkhāni me nāśaya sarva kuśala dharma paripūram me kuru sarvakarma āvaraṇa kleśa paravata me vikira mahābodhisattva siddhi vīryapāramitā yoga me sanniyojaya araṇadharma virāga viraja sañjaha prajaha dhāriṇī sama khasama jalanidhi sama meru sama mahābodhisattva paradā svāhā.

When Mañjughoṣa speaks this mantra that accomplishes every aim of the vidyā,
immediately all sentient beings
are freed from birth and old age.
All the lower destinies become pacified,
the hosts of māras tremble greatly,
all the gods rejoice with great delight,
and those who lead others astray are seized with fear.
Even in the very moment this dhāraṇī that pacifies evil is spoken,
countless hundreds of thousands — as many as the drops in the ocean —
are liberated from the prison of saṃsāra.

When Mañjuśrī in his youthful form
proclaims the gentle melody
and speaks this vidyā mantra,
the very ground — of rocks, forests, and groves alike —
trembles there in that place,
whether among beings that move or those that do not move.
The light of the buddhas' radiance
spreads and pervades the surface of the earth.
All obstructors, misleaders,
and rākṣasas of terrifying form —

They raised their voices together in harmonious words:
"Homage to the one who possesses the ten powers!"

The gods, robed in the garb of peace,
all filled with gladness of mind,
drew near to the one who holds the great vajra sword
and spoke:

"Homage to you, supreme giver of the best,
the best of vajras!
O Mañjuśrī, great in power,
possessed of a thousand forces, victorious,
you who utterly crush the domain of obstructors,
holder of mantras, bearer of the great secret mantra,
lord of beings with forms of every kind,
supremely powerful, beautiful and terrifying in form,
you who crush the fierce and the ferocious,
glorious one who commands splendor upon splendor,
the illustrious one, the example without equal,
vajra-holder who purifies the heart,
you who dispel the blindness of unknowing,
possessor of the finest elegant bearing,
lord of beings, rejoicing in elegance,
long-armed one, you who bow to the powerful,
you who dispel the enemy-afflictions,
clothed in garments of many beautiful kinds,
adorned with various flower garlands,
with beautiful eyes and a beautiful head,
joyful and clothed in beautiful raiment,
Mañjuśrī who laughs aloud,
possessing eyes that distinguish white from black,
proclaiming the sound ha ha loud and clear,
delighting to teach with utmost clarity,
of vast and golden hue,
whose domain is the essence of the ocean,
knowing modes of conduct and endowed with modes of conduct,
making the hearts of the hostile tremble with fear,
clad in blue who guards the earth,
gladding the hearts of the lords of gods,
god of desire who teaches the cessation of desire,
you who hold the royal world,
famed as steadfast among the steadfast,
spread in all directions by your qualities,
bowing, we bow and pay homage,
ever offering worship and proclaiming praise.
Great in power, mighty in strength,
long-armed one, master of great battle,
supremely magnificent, possessor of the noble vajra,
knowing shame, protecting wisdom, knowing modesty,
supreme essence of the great maṇḍala,
teacher who reveals the great maṇḍala,
famed as the great maṇḍala,
you who enact the great maṇḍala,
maṇḍala master, possessor of the maṇḍala,
worthy of reverence at whose feet we place our weight,
the great lord of ha ha svāhā,
whose great worship is equal to the earth,
you who inspire fear with hūṃ and are fearful yourself,
brilliant with the radiance of fearfulness,
bowed to by gods and demigods (asuras) alike,
and just so worshipped and depicted in images,
whose stride and reach are vast and far,
you who dispel fierce winds and darkness,
renowned and praised in all three worlds,
attended upon by yakṣas and rākṣasas,
the fierce one made white, source of well-being,
lord of arrows, bearing the jewel at the crown,
ever displaying a smile and elegance in all things,
whose conduct is as steadfast as the earth,
whose jewel-maṇḍala is radiant with beautiful light,
bright as the sun, blazing with clarity,
like rays of sunlight within a rainbow's arc,
suffused throughout and spread wide,
gladsome to behold, you who bring gladness,
giver of wealth and equally giver of secret mantra,
giver of lordship and giver of royal sovereignty,
giver of form and equally giver of power,
glorious one who acts with courage, mountain that subdues obstructors,
you who dispel all delusion,
you who come to your seat in the midst of the assembly,
you at whose feet a multitude of offerings is gathered,
adorned with armlets, ear-ornaments, and earrings,
ornamented with jeweled adornments,
lamp for those who move and those who do not move,
you who dispel blindness and obscuration,
the teacher who teaches and who protects,
lord of the senses, sovereign, supreme among warriors,
you who dispel fear
and grant the state free from fear,
white, blue, of beautiful radiance,
the teacher of the blue-throated one,
who tames in whatever way taming is needed
and thus supremely demonstrates modes of conduct,
you who strike with the sword of wisdom,
earnestly embracing the Dharma of emptiness,
knowing Maitreya (loving-kindness) as supreme and as the last,
clearly heard and decisively renowned,
praised by the holders of vidyā mantras,
O great and powerful holder of vidyā mantras,
supremely victorious wheel-turner,
fearless, possessed of intelligence and wisdom,
Tathāgata who upholds the Dharma."

Taming through beautiful song, the peaceful one,
who demonstrates the path of peace,
honored by gods and demigods (asuras) together,
who grants fearlessness to all sentient beings,
supremely teaching all sentient beings,
steady, supreme among all sentient beings,
skilled in the minds of sentient beings,
Nirmita (son of no-craving), of fierce and powerful strength,
like the light of fire,
the youthful one who grants the supreme body, the supreme gift,
who demonstrates play and sport,
who performs mudrās and enacts secret mantras,
who does not grasp at self, stainless and steady,
like space, beyond comparison, skilled in speech,
the certain vanquisher of the hosts of Māra,
supreme among men, whose diligence cannot be shaken,
likewise invincible, utterly victorious,
steady buddha, Tathāgata,
free from sorrow, without fixed abode,
unconquerable, of beautiful speech and beautiful deportment,
the hero who utterly vanquishes enemies,
the great adept, the decisive yogin,
who pervades desire's harm and passes beyond it,
protector, supreme son of the Victors,
who defeats the lord of death (Yama) and protects all creatures,
who utterly burns karma and mental afflictions,
the teacher who removes afflictions —
excellent one, your supreme names,
one hundred and eight, blazing bright,
and this, which generates faith —
have been proclaimed by the foremost gods.

Great obstacles, false guides,
yakṣas, asuras, and rākṣasas,
those who steal radiance, the fierce and the wild,
today have offered this excellent praise.

Then Mañjuśrī, having gazed with steady, outstretched attention,
even looked upon them with ease,
and having looked upon them all,
spoke these very words:

"May all of you always be free from obstacles,
may you attain the excellently sure liberation,
fearless and truly auspicious.
Do not regard me with fear."

Then the Tathāgata, greatly and gently smiling,
and resounding with the great sound of thunder,
his face luminously clear,
gazed toward the east and declared:

"Alas, O supreme domain of secret mantras —
for the sake of dispelling the delusion of sentient beings,
O sentient beings, your accumulation of merit
has come to be supremely vast.

Alas, for the thorough purification
of those sentient beings who have greatly accumulated merit,
this accomplished dhāraṇī of the supreme gift
is taught with a gentle recitation.

Whoever, entering into meditative equipoise,
recites this accomplished dhāraṇī
that removes all suffering,
or hears it, or even holds it in mind —
all their aims will be accomplished,
and they will be liberated from all suffering.
The purification of all misdeeds
will certainly be attained by them.
The great ground of the Tathāgatas, too,
without long delay will they obtain.

The bodhisattvas' grounds —
Supreme Joy, the Stainless, the Luminous, the Radiant,
the Difficult to Cultivate, the Manifest,
the Far-Going, the Immovable,
Good Intellect, and Cloud of Dharma —
those great and sacred grounds as well
will be attained without delay, swiftly,
by those great-minded sentient beings
who have the wish to firmly abide there.
The purification of all misdeeds,
being beloved to all sentient beings,
the pacification of all conceptual elaborations —
unsurpassed awakening will be attained.

This pleasing collection of one hundred and eight names —
which arouses all holders of vidyā mantras,
pacifies all misdeeds,
and is supremely auspicious and virtuous —
pressing together the ten fingers in añjali,
sitting before Mañjuśrī of melodious voice,
and with a mind extremely clear and pure,
rising at dawn and reciting it:

For that one, all holders of vidyā mantras,
and likewise the lords of gods,
along with many yakṣas and rākṣasas,
will always and constantly provide protection.
All the sons of the Tathāgatas,
the Tathāgatas themselves,
and likewise those who bear the vajra weapon —
they will certainly provide that one with protection.

That one will appear to abide in the form of a buddha,
appearing to be in meditative equipoise.
The lords of gods, the yakṣas,
the great obstacles and false guides,
with joy and with pure intention,
from afar will offer prostrations."

Therefore, though the obstacles take delight and would seek to harm,
they are unable to do so.
One who recites it even a single time
will attain merit equal to that of the Great Brahmā.

Whoever, possessed of great wisdom,
recites the supreme name each day and each night —
stainless and utterly pure —
will attain the radiant, clear-sounding resonance,
and will obtain the abode of joy
pleasing to all sentient beings.

Incomparable, generating power,
traveling the supreme path,
praised by the gods who possess luminosity and sacred commitment,
enchanting assemblies of gods and demigods (asuras) who gather with devotion —
this dhāraṇī has been well spoken by the Victors.

Here is completed the dhāraṇī together with its mantra of the noble Mañjuśrī's one hundred and eight names.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The mantra section is transliterated Sanskrit in Tibetan script and is rendered here in reconstructed Sanskrit phonetic form, as is standard practice for liturgical dhāraṇī texts. Some syllables are corrupt or hybrid forms not reducible to clear Sanskrit lexical meaning; the transliteration follows the Tibetan spelling closely without normalization of every form.

The closing verse section ends mid-sentence in the supplied passage, cutting off after the mention of rākṣasas of terrifying form; the translation renders what is present and does not supply what follows.  The passage is a long hymn of praise, structured as a litany of epithets, with nearly every line functioning as a name or quality in the vocative. The phrase rendered "the teacher of the blue-throated one" refers to Mañjuśrī as teacher of Śiva, whose blue throat is a well-known mythological mark. The line "knowing Maitreya as supreme and as the last" likely refers to the bodhisattva Maitreya as the future and final buddha of this era, with Mañjuśrī being praised as knowing him in both capacities. The final vocative "Tathāgata who upholds the Dharma" is doctrinally unusual as an address to Mañjuśrī but follows the tantric convention of assimilating bodhisattvas to buddha-rank epithets.  The name rendered "Nirmita, son of no-craving" translates སྲེད་མེད་བུ, literally "son of Nirmita" or "son of the craving-free one." In Buddhist cosmology this is a name associated with the deity Maheśvara's son or a figure in the divine realms; the epithet is applied here to the figure being praised. The precise referent is somewhat ambiguous in context but the literal rendering is given.

The ten bodhisattva grounds listed follow the standard Mahāyāna enumeration: Supreme Joy (Pramuditā), Stainless (Vimalā), Luminous (Prabhākarī), Radiant (Arciṣmatī), Difficult to Cultivate (Sudurjayā), Manifest (Abhimukhī), Far-Going (Dūraṃgamā), Immovable (Acalā), Good Intellect (Sādhumatī), and Cloud of Dharma (Dharmameghā).  The phrase rendered "gods who possess luminosity and sacred commitment" translates a compound combining luminosity (clear light) and samaya (sacred commitment or vow), referring to deities of the tantric maṇḍala who are bearers of samaya. This is a genuine technical usage and the rendering preserves both elements.

The line "the radiant, clear-sounding resonance" renders a cluster of terms meaning clear light, pleasant sound, and purity; the sense is that the practitioner's voice and presence become luminous, melodious, and undefiled — a standard fruit of name-recitation in this genre.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
