The Ritual of the Great Commander of Yakṣas, the Supreme Dancer (Mahāyakṣasenāpatinarakuparka­kalpa)

Toh 766 in the Kangyur is a tantric ritual text known in Sanskrit as the Mahāyakṣasenapatinarakuparka­kalpa and in Tibetan as the Gnod sbyin gyi sde dpon chen po gar mkhan mchog gi brtag pa, meaning "The Ritual of the Great Commander of Yakṣas, the Supreme Dancer." The text belongs to the class of kalpa, or ritual procedure texts, and centers on Vajrapāṇi in his wrathful form as the great lord of yakṣas — powerful spirit beings of the Buddhist cosmos — celebrating his qualities and prescribing rites for his propitiation. Opening with homages to the Three Jewels and to the glorious Vajrapāṇi, it unfolds as a discourse delivered by the Buddha while residing in the celestial palace of Vaiśravaṇa's son, in the company of a vast assembly of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and other non-human beings. As a tantra found within the Kangyur, it sits among the ritual and esoteric scriptures of the Tibetan Buddhist canon.

In the language of India: Mahāyakṣa­sena­pati­nara­ku­parka­kalpa. In the language of Tibet: The Ritual of the Great Commander of Yakṣas, the Supreme Dancer.

Homage to the Three Jewels. Homage to the glorious Vajrapāṇi.

Lord of yakṣas, blazing with the splendor of a hundred thousand suns,
with rays of light beyond measure, taming those who are hostile,
whose very nature is compassion, accomplishing the welfare of all beings without exception,
vanquishing the four māras — to him I pay homage.

Thus did I hear. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling in the Palace of the Grove of Willows, in the abode of the son of King Vaiśravaṇa, surrounded by a retinue beyond count: gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas (scent-eaters), asuras, garuḍas (celestial eagles), kiṃnaras (half-humans), and great serpents; Śakra (Indra, king of the gods), Brahmā, the World-Protectors, the Greatly Powerful One, the Great God (Śiva), Precious Excellence, Wholesome Fullness, the God of Power, the Strength of Great Power, the Lord of Joy, Great Black One, Bheśvara, the assembly of the Mātṛkās (mother-goddesses), the Abider in Secrecy, the Dweller in the Precious Quarters of the Four Directions, Proclaimer, Full Proclaimer, Terrifier, Precious Secret, Supreme Abiding Secret, Boundless Secret, Supremely Excellent Fang, Coiled Fang, Sharp Fang, One with the Feet of a Tigress, Bull-Headed One, Victor's Sage, Aḍavaka, Utterly Crushing, Light-Maker, One Endowed with Supreme Splendor, Extremely Radiant, Right Knower, Beautiful-Eyed, Desiring to Contemplate, One with Golden Body-Hair, One with Golden Locks, Fully Coiled, Fully Victorious, Blazing Speaker, One with a Human Skull, Perfectly Abiding, Noble Shouldered, Pañcika, Flower-Fanged, Flower-Crested, Jewel-Crested, Lord of Wealth, Supremely Secret, Supremely Endowed, Body of Fierce Force, Solar Splendor, Solar Radiance, Sun of Joy, Gnashing Fangs, Blazing Garland, Blazing Radiance, Radiance of the Brave, Terrifying Radiance, Abiding Everywhere — these and others, great commanders of yakṣas of immense power and miraculous ability, surrounded by innumerable hundreds of thousands, all came and took their places in the presence of the Blessed One.

Many bodhisattvas also came and took their places, headed by Vajragarbha. The great elder Śāriputra and others, a great assembly of śrāvakas, and the gathered retinue of the great vidyādharas (knowledge-holders) came and were present. Innumerable sages endowed with the five higher knowledges came. Vajrapāṇi, lord of yakṣas, also came, surrounded by a great retinue.

The Restorer's Son, the Supreme Dancer — that very Vajrapāṇi, lord of yakṣas — appeared in the aspect of the Greatly Powerful One: of beautiful appearance, beautiful face, beautiful body, and beautiful hands; bearing a jewel of many kinds coiling together; with a beautiful head and beautiful eyes; his body adorned equally with flowers of many varieties, bearing a splendor that surpassed the sun and moon; his body adorned with ornaments of every kind. The nāga king Nanda, his intimate friend, formed his girdle of matted locks; the nāga king Takṣaka bound his waist-sash. Bearing various reflections and various weapons, holding the moon and the sun, his body blazing on all sides, illuminating everything, his face broadly smiling, he sat with a proud mind in the presence of the Blessed One.

Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa's son rose from his seat —

he came to where the Blessed One was, and made offerings to the Blessed One with jewels of many kinds. He took up various flowers born on land and born in water — lotuses, kumuda water-lilies, puṇḍarīka white lotuses, blue utpala lotuses, saugandhika fragrant lotuses, vārṣika blossoms, campaka flowers, māndārava flowers, mañdāravaka flowers, and others of their kind — and with these he made offering to the Blessed One. Then, having circumambulated the Blessed One a thousand hundred times, he spoke these words to the Blessed One:

"Blessed One, an immense great assembly of innumerable yakṣas has gathered — yakṣas who devour great flesh and who devour human bodies, flaming ones and those who assume forms of many kinds — and a multitude has assembled: gods, nāgas, yakṣas, flaming spirits, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, great serpents, humans, and non-humans of every variety. Blessed One, the retinues of the great vidyādharas (holders of knowledge-mantras) and the assemblies of great seers have also gathered. Many hosts of bodhisattvas have also arrived and behold it all as a wonder unprecedented from the very beginning. Blessed One, that teaching which you intend to teach — may the Blessed One please teach it. May the Sugata now, at this very time, teach it."

Then the Blessed One breathed a sigh of relief to the great king Comfort-Giver and entered into meditative absorption in the samādhi called "The Great Ray of Light That Everywhere Burns, Taming Yakṣas."

No sooner had the Blessed One entered into that meditative absorption than rays of light of many kinds issued from the body of the Blessed One, illuminating the world-realm of the great trichiliocosm with those rays of light. They stirred all the yakṣas, flaming spirits, elemental spirits, hungry ghosts, flesh-eaters, and planetary spirits gathered there, and stirred every malevolent nāga and every nāga, and then returned to circle the body of the Blessed One three times, entered the crown of the Blessed One's head, and the Blessed One smiled. From that smile, seven-hued rays of light issued from the gateway of his mouth and entered the crown of the head of Sucandra (Śubhacandra), the supreme dancer, son of the great king Vaiśravaṇa.

The moment the Blessed One's light entered there, the supreme dancer Sucandra, lord of yakṣas, shone forth in his own form: a body of terrifying laughter, vast and hollow, crushing yakṣas utterly; a body standing like Mount Meru with a great body and a thousand arms; shaking the earth greatly, overwhelming it with immense power; bearing weapons of many kinds and emitting a sound of terror; bound with a garland of human skulls; holding in his hand a vessel filled with the blood of human heads; draped across the upper body with a tiger skin; renowned for moving with the tread of a lion. He came close to where the Blessed One was, circumambulated the Blessed One three times, and spoke these words:

"Blessed One, I possess an essence — one that utterly destroys every host of asuras, that summons gods, nāgas, and yakṣas near, that utterly crushes nāgas, that destroys yakṣas, elemental spirits, flesh-eaters, and all planetary spirits, and before which Brahmā, Indra (Śakra), and the great powers bow down. It is one that accomplishes every vidyādhara's (knowledge-mantra-holder's) practice by the mere utterance of its name. I, Blessed One, wish to recite it aloud in the presence of this great assembly that has arrived — so that every vidyādhara's practice may be accomplished, and —"

— so that the hopes of every sentient being may be completely fulfilled: accomplished by the mere utterance of its name, and bringing forth the attainments of all vidyādharas even by a single moment of recollection; entering into all maṇḍalas and coming to know the sacred pledges. It is this: the family of the Tathāgata, the family of the Jewel, the family of the Elephant of Benefit, the family of the Lotus, and the family of the Vajra — bestowing the attainment of the great maṇḍala; causing entry into all the mudrās of all sacred pledges and all maṇḍalas; conferring the chapters of the mantras of the great dhāraṇī. Even a single moment of recollection by the Blessed One when young will confer all attainments in return. I request that the crowns of all families of the Blessed One be consecrated with empowerment. Blessed One, look upon me with affection and please bestow in return the attainments of the maṇḍala of the great seal, of the chapters, and of the mantras.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, spoke thus to the lord of the host of yakṣas, Nartakamukhya: "That I may confer, through my blessing, the universal maṇḍala of all families, the mudrās, and the accomplished dhāraṇī mantras — so that all vidyādharas may obtain attainment — lord of yakṣas, proclaim it!"

Then the lord of the host of yakṣas, Nartakamukhya, approached where the Blessed One was, circumambulated the Blessed One three times, sat in his presence, and recited these words of the secret mantra:

Āryā Naratakupera. Mūla-mantra. Oṃ āthāto jvalita. Hūtabhahota tabhā. Kaṇakāmaṇi. Śīlatopaha-sakā. Maṇipralambha-hara ardha-hari. Cittaharitāla chandana agaru. Duruska. Sakṛta-sannadhya-śarīraṃ. Mahāmeru-mandāra-dhara. Varagambhāra-dhīradhyarya. Asuragaṇa. Niyundamandha-ra-daśa-dharaṇi. Dharagambhīra. Dhīra. Phira-phira. Māphira-māphira. Asuragaṇani. Sudhanamarddhanaṃ. Tajjani. Biyumig. Aṅgara-atigati-raṇa. Brabhā-anuraciti. Maṇḍalana. Kavālamālā. Abhavaddhvājāti. Hasakulam. Nirmalaṃ. Saṃbulaṃ. Sāgarasumeruvaravata. Tarita-radha-śikharādhātu-śelapata. Nagaraṃ. Amoghataśa-āditya. Maṇḍalana. Śaśi-kirana-movidhāraṃ. Cala-cimala. Sagala. Jyonakṛta. Avabhāsaṃkulaṃ. Pramathaṃ. Asurabha-vana. Kulānāśanaṃ. Brahme-ndra. Rudranmakṛtaṃ. Nāmtitṛaṃ. Pūjitaṃ. Sarvavidyādhara-namaskṛtaṃ. Śiravisidhaya-śa. Gandharvasuci-taṃ. Mahāmeru-maṇḍalana. Kuṇḍaladhamma. Varayadmyossa-vidvadhamma. Bhuñjakātakṣakapāsuki. Sāgara. Naṃṭopanata. Galakabhola-mekhalālaṃkṛta. Gatidyod-hṛdakapālamālaṃ. Ālaṃkṛta. Śarīra. Śrīraprajvalita-morataraṃ. Āyurbhapana-vegaja. Vakacaturaṅga-cakracaraṇaṃ. Aprameya-vara. Vajramusiddhi-khadtakato-māraya. Paraśupāśacakra. Asi-triśūla. Mudgara. Brahmaraṇan. Marakuvaraṃ. Varakuparaṃ. Suredhran. Suveśam. Subākaṭrakraṃ. Suguhyakraṃ. Siddhe-nasani. Narakupara. Paraṃ-tayiṣyāmi. Ehyehi-bhagavan. Narakupara. Kupara. Hasa-hasa. Turu-turu. Citi-citi. Vicati-vicati. Vajra-vajra. Ca-vajra-vajra. Hara-hara. Huru-huru. Hana-hana. Vidhāṃsaya. Vidrāvaya. Utsādaya. Uparaya. Uparaya. Narakupara. Varakupara. Śupakupara. Yakṣakupara. Guhakupara. Madha-madha. Gajja-gajja. Tajja-tajja. Naraja-naraja. Hari-hari. Hari-locanī. Nīla-locana. Tīvra-locchana. Suvarṇa-locana. Meghagoṣodbhava. Hala-hala. Śabdagaṇa.

Kānāba ya. He he he he. Narakakupara. He narakupara kupara. Varakupara. Āviśa āpiśa. Sukuvarakupara. Vakuvara. Cala cala. Moridhacalayavarj. Lagulagu. Kurukuru. Advatvadaśakulaṃ. Kulakula. Kilakila. Huluhulu. Muñca muñca. Śaptakūlaṃ. Naramungara. Kupara. Var var var. Vajradhara. Padmadhara. Musaladhara. Cakradhara. Laṅgadhara. Varśūdhara. Ayomusala. Trāsanakara. Dharadhara. Dharaṇi. Dharacandra. Sūryamāladhara. Nakṣatra. Nakṣatragrahāmaṇḍalagrahaśa abyidatajvalate. Jvakara. Sagharasaraviśoṣaṇakaramadsamadkara. Śiśumārukhitavāśadhara. Asuragaṇānāṃ. Mardanakara. Kumbhandayakṣarākṣasa. Hṛdayosmādanakharama. Stambhagavan. Narakupara. Varakupara. Narjanarj. Harahari. Hāri. Hāri locanā svāhā.

This is the first of the vidyās of the supreme dancer that which empties. For dispersing clouds, one should use an arrow or a karavīra switch or a Nepalese cane switch, or ashes. With a peacock-feather switch, one should wave it in the direction of the clouds as one would when driving birds away, and when rain is falling, if one fumigates with a bellows the rain will be caused to move off. By reciting once and then fumigating with bdellium incense, one subdues elemental spirits, yakṣas, planetary spirits, fiery beings, and possessing demons; they will all descend, reveal everything, and speak whatever is asked. By reciting once over bdellium incense and fumigating, they will be made to move. Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, fiery beings, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, great serpents, flame-goddesses, flesh-eating demonesses, and all such beings, if one recites once over bdellium incense and fumigates, will all be summoned and made to speak. They will reveal whatever remains incomplete. If one recites once over bdellium incense and fumigates, they will be driven away from the region. Food prepared with butter and white mustard seed can be moved to wherever one wishes. If one mentally recalls the mantra over the house of one who carries loads, then fumigates with bdellium incense, all that is being carried will be moved to wherever one desires. To destroy all epidemic diseases and to protect oneself, one should recite once over white mustard seed, ash, and the milk water, fumigate with bdellium incense, and bind a protective cord around the neck; all fears and all illnesses will be dispelled. If one wishes to send an epidemic disease to someone else, one should recite once over bdellium incense and fumigate; immediately even a thousand travelers will be struck by the epidemic. That same fumigation will also cure them. If one wishes to transmit a quartan fever, one should mix beef and bdellium incense together, recite for seven days and burn them seven times; the person whose name was taken up will be struck by the fever. If one recites over bdellium incense seven times and burns it, they will recover in turn. If one recites over bdellium incense seven times and places it in a fire together with someone's name, whatever persons' names were taken up will be seized by a planetary spirit. If one makes a ball from ash, places it on the crown of someone's head, binds it, and recites, they will be liberated. If one wishes to pacify all epidemic diseases, a single recitation over a black cord or a cotton thread will bring peace. Whatever activity one wishes to accomplish, a single recitation over bdellium incense will accomplish it. This is the first chapter, the chapter of the many activities, from the examination of the supreme dancer.

Namo ratnatrayāya. Namo Vaiśravaṇasya. Mahārājasya. Narakuparasya. Guhyakāntapati. Mā bhartiṣyāmi. Anurūpasurūpa. Narakupara candra. Khannacakana. He mahāsakana. Narakuparaṃ. He makana. Kuhakana. Cala cala. Paca paca. Phulu phulu. Kupara svāhā.

That which simultaneously tames fierce blazing ones and accomplishes all activities without fail, together with all activities of attainment, and

all supreme purposes whatsoever will be accomplished by mere utterance.

If one wishes to drive someone away, one makes a peg of acacia wood measuring eight finger-widths, recites over it once completely, and drives it into that person's doorway — they will be expelled immediately. If the peg is removed, they will be released.

Recite over white mustard seed twenty-one times, throw it into an enemy's home, and they will immediately be driven to wander. Recite over bdellium incense twenty-one times, burn it, and they will be released from the wandering.

If one wishes to cause someone to wander, one makes a peg from a human bone measuring eight finger-widths, recites over it once completely, fumigates it with bdellium incense, and drives it into the doorpost — within three days, together with everything they have, they will be driven to wander. To retrieve them, recite once completely, take hold of their name, and strike the ground beneath with a hammer; that person's body will be shattered to pieces. If the peg is removed, they are freed.

If, holding that person's name, one buries it in a charnel ground, a great elemental spirit will seize them; if removed, they will be freed. If one buries it in an empty house, holding their name, flesh-eaters will seize them; if removed, they are freed. If one digs into the ground in a temple and buries it there, a great deity will seize them; if removed, they are freed. If one digs into the ground in a garden and buries it there, holding that person's name, they will abandon all their relatives, retinue, sons and daughters, and their entire home, and flee in every direction, roaming through forests like a wild mountain animal; if removed, they are freed.

All of these are accomplished by a single recitation over bdellium incense.

If one makes a square maṇḍala, recites over a hammer once, fumigates it with bdellium incense, and places the hammer in the center of the maṇḍala, the yakṣas, the blazing ones, the female blazing ones, and the male and female yakṣas will weep and flee in all directions. If one makes an image or a painted depiction of a yakṣa, recites over it once, and fumigates it with bdellium incense, the yakṣas, the blazing ones, and the male and female yakṣas will remain and perform all activities one desires. They will also reveal and draw out all treasures.

If one makes an image or painted depiction of a wealth-spirit, fumigates it with bdellium incense, recites the mantra, waves it in threat, and strikes it immediately with a hammer, it will weep and come forward, and will joyfully offer up all excellent things and all grain and wealth as one desires. If this is done to the supreme dancer himself, he will die on the spot. If one treads upon the wealth-spirit's foot, fumigates with bdellium incense, and recites the mantra seven times in succession — if he does not come swiftly, his head will split into seven pieces.

If one mixes white mustard seed with ash, recites over it seven times, places it on the crown of one's head, fumigates with bdellium incense, and recites the mantra in succession, then the wealth-spirit together with a thousand yakṣas will come forward with their wealth, will perform all activities, and will come under one's command.

If one treads upon the foot of a great powerful one, fumigates with bdellium incense, and recites the mantra, the image will stir and move; if struck with white mustard seed, it will speak and grant all phenomena. Called forward to one's presence, it will obey all commands, accomplish all desired purposes, and bestow all the attainments of every practice.

If white mustard seed recited over seven times is placed inside a human skull and bound at a fierce door, then for as long as the skull remains at that fierce door, all desired purposes will be accomplished, all supreme things will be given, and every command will be carried out. If fumigated with bdellium incense and the mantra is recited in succession, it will speak and perform all activities, bestowing all excellent attainments.

If it is pressed down with the foot of Brahmā, fumigated with bdellium incense, and the mantra is recited, then washed with milk and yogurt, Brahmā will be summoned before one in his own form and will thereafter bestow all the practices of secret mantra and all attainments.

If that milk used in the washing is mixed with the food of rice porridge and eaten, one will be able to recite from memory every scriptural transmission one has heard, and one will follow the mantras of all practices. Everything one has heard will be retained without loss, and one will come to possess a voice with the resonance of Brahmā's tone — be it the voice of a human or of any other being. Having attained complete purity of body, one will live for a thousand years; and having grown hair that coils and twists, all people will clasp one's two feet, bow in reverence, and carry out every command.

If an image is placed in a pit dug in the center of a charnel ground, all spirits will be tormented and the body will be shattered to pieces. The eyes will burst from their sockets, and within three months death will come.

If an image of a nāga is made and placed in the center of a maṇḍala, and all flowers and incenses are offered, and the mantra is recited completely on a stick of oleander wood, then with the mantra kept present in mind and the image melted, all nāgas will come and send down a great continuous rain. All nāgas will be made to work, and all will act according to one's command.

If a nāga image is made and melted with a stick of Nepali citron wood, all hailstorms will be cut off.

For binding all winds, one should recite the mantra completely while seated on a soft cushion, sitting at the doorway of a tall building, and all winds will be bound.

Taking hold of a human skull, if an enemy's name is seized and the skull is stirred with an oleander stick, all activities will be accomplished by a single recitation of the mantra.

This is the second chapter, the ritual chapter of all activities, from the Tantra of the Supreme Dancer among Yakṣas.

Namo peśramaṇa sutāla divya vimāna ciriti ya. Hema alakuṇḍala śarīrāya. Yakṣa rakṣa. Sabanti dhaya. Taṃbhagana na. Māvrtayiṣyumi. Tadyathā. Vani vani. Kuṭa kaṭa. Kuṭṭha kuṭṭha. Kuku kuku. Para para. Kupar kupar. Nara kuvar. Divya vimāni kuṭali. Tuti tuti svāhā.

Next, if one wishes to protect a yakṣa or yakṣa woman, one should make a flat board from Indian fig wood and draw upon it a yakṣa woman: her complexion dark-blue, her face wrathful and frowning, her fangs bared upward and her body unclothed, adorned with all ornaments, in her left hand holding a human skull filled with blood, and her right hand in the gesture of supreme giving. Before this image one should recite the vidyā mantra one hundred thousand times while eating only white food. When the hundred thousand recitations are complete, the yakṣa woman will come before one, and to her one should offer a white torma and water of hospitality. She will say: "What shall I do? Please give your command." The holder of the vidyā should say: "You are my wife," and she will reply: "So it shall be," and then vanish from sight.

Thereafter a woman adorned with all ornaments will come, and one will delight and sport together, enjoying the five desirable qualities. The holder of the vidyā will come to possess the power of the great yakṣa, will be able to go wherever one wishes and move through the sky, and will be able to sustain life for five thousand years.

Then, for one who wishes to perform a fierce activity and undertake it: one should dress in a great robe, wrap the lower body in a tiger skin, and in the center of a charnel ground perform a fire offering with whatever blood is available, completely sustained for twelve days. Then a woman riding a lion, with four arms — holding a bell, a battle-axe, a mace, and in one hand a trident — will come before one.

She came before him, and she spoke: "Holder of the vidyā, I am hungry." And the torma offered there is at the command of the Supreme Dancer; one should partake of it as one pleases. Then one should offer her water for washing the hands. She spoke: "What is your request?" And the holder of the vidyā should say: "Perform all my activities." She spoke: "Holder of the vidyā, so be it," and then she reveals everything that is needed, as well as all hidden treasures.

Then, for one who wishes to anoint with a certain substance: mix red ochre together with blood inside the hollow of a freshly severed human head, recite the mantra eight times over it, and stir it with a stick of oleander (karāvīra). The human head will then burst into flame. If one makes a ball of it and throws it, one will travel through the sky, and one will sport together with the holder of the vidyā. If one applies a dot of it to the heart center, one will become invisible and will be able to enter any place one desires. If one anoints the eyes with it, one will see all hidden treasures, and one will see all the gateways of the asuras without obstruction. One will see all the dwelling-places of the nāgas, and will sport with all manner of wanderers and experience joy.

If one eats it, one will live for a hundred thousand eons and will become a wheel-turning holder of the vidyā, with hair curling and swirling, endowed with the voice and tone of a kiṃnara and of Brahmā.

For one who wishes to perform paralysis: make a figure in the ashes of a charnel ground, recite the mantra seven times over a thorn-acacia stake, and drive it into the heart of the figure — it will become paralyzed; pull it out and it will be released.

On the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, enter a charnel ground, recite the mantra twenty-one times in succession, then take collyrium (añjana) and mix it together with savīra, recite the mantra twenty-one times completely, and anoint the eyes with it. One will be endowed with supreme fortune and splendor, and whoever one looks upon will come under one's power. One will be dear to all the world, and will be venerated by all.

Recite the mantra twenty-one times over gorocana and apply it as a dot. One will be endowed with supreme fortune, will accomplish all one's aims, will gain power over all women, and all beings will become one's friends. If one eats it, one will be victorious in disputes. If one washes one's face with water over which the mantra has been recited twenty-one times, even an enraged king will be pacified. All the world will be dear to one, and one will become one who is taken into the speech of the holder. All of this is to be accomplished through the smoke of guggul resin.

This is the third chapter, from the tantra of the Supreme Dancer yakṣa: the chapter on eye medicine, gorocana, and the accomplishment of the yakṣinī.

From here onward, the maṇḍala ritual of the Supreme Dancer, the great yakṣa, will be explained.

Venerated by all the accomplished gods, honored by Brahmā, Gatotkaca, and Śakra (Indra), blessed by all the Tathāgatas, venerated by all the bodhisattvas, praised by all the sages (ṛṣis), having received the sacred pledge from all yakṣas and blazing ones, possessing all inquiries and all vidyās —

Then one should examine the signs that mark a pure and accomplished site. Then the holder of the vidyā should be made pure: after thoroughly bathing, one should dress in clean white garments, eat white food, and constantly apply oneself to recitation.

On the bright fortnight, one should examine the stars, the planets, and the lunar mansions, choosing an auspicious and pleasing day with a favorable aspect. One should anoint the maṇḍala with the dung of a milk-bearing cow that has fallen on the road, and draw out the maṇḍala most excellently in three tiers, measuring twelve cubits. When drawing all the lines throughout, it should be made very level and square, with four gates, measured out in equal proportions. In the central section of eight cubits' measure, one should draw it beautifully with white sandalwood. In the inner section of four cubits' measure, with agaru, saffron, and —

camphor mixed in. In the center of the maṇḍala, one should draw the supreme dancer adorned with all ornaments, having sixteen arms and bearing the marks. In the outer maṇḍala, one should draw Brahmā, Desire, the Great Lord (Indra), and the Greatly Powerful One. At the four corners, one should draw the Four Great Kings. In the expanse of the outer maṇḍala, one should draw many and various yakṣas. At the four gates, one should draw Auspicious Fullness, Noble Jewel, the God of Strength, and the Lord of Joy. In the central maṇḍala's place, one should install the image of the solitary brave buddha, the Lion of the Śākyans — Śākyamuni — with Vajrapāṇi on his right and Śakra holding a yak-tail fan and fanning to his left and right.

In the northern quarter's enclosure, one should place twenty-five full vessels and eight silver bowls. In the western quarter, twenty-five cups and bowls; and likewise in the eastern and southern quarters as well. One should place one hundred and eight torma offerings, thirty-two torma vessels, one hundred and eight garlands of grain, fruit, and flowers, one hundred and eight water bowls, and in the spaces between, various weapons. One should also place sixty-four food offerings, thirty condiments, one hundred and eight victory banners, and four golden vessels in the center of the maṇḍala. One should place four hammers, thirty wheels, four iron maces, four arrows, and four vessels. Various perfumes and various incenses are to be offered in due sequence. Everywhere one hangs silk canopies, and together with the various musical instruments, placed at the directions and the intermediate directions, one offers tormas to the yakṣas and the blazing ones in accordance with the ritual.

An image made of cloth, with its face turned toward the south, is placed there, and in the early morning the mantra is recited seven times and tormas are offered. At midday, in the afternoon, and at sunset, likewise one recites and makes offerings.

Then, mixing bdellium resin with white mustard seed, one should burn twenty-one portions before the face of the image.

Thereupon, when the supreme dancer himself has arrived, he comes in the likeness of a child, prostrates before the buddha, and says to the vidyādhāra: "Child, have you come in peace? Come here! Ask for the highest attainment, and whatever you desire I will grant you." Then one should present the fee for the teaching and receive the highest. He bestows whatever supreme thing is wished for — whether to become a vidyādhāra, a world-protector, a wheel-turning monarch, a lord, a lord of the union of attainments, one who rests from fatigue — whatever you desire he will grant. To say nothing of worldly necessities he gives, he will also grant: long life, accomplishment of aims, friendship with worldly people, a kingdom, or the gaining of a territory. He will also accomplish the attainment of a red sorcery rite using a red lacquer, traveling through the sky, becoming invisible, purification of the eyes, the introduction of the rites of knowledge into the inner sanctum by the rite of asuras, attaining the desired form, the enjoyments of the sense faculties, the subjugation of kings, knowledge of the languages of beasts and birds, the recollection of former lives, and all the activities associated with the forms of yakṣas and blazing ones.

With this secret mantra, the supreme dancer is requested to depart:

Namo Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Narakupārāya. Oṃ sarasa naṭaṭa naṭaṭa gacche svabhāvanāma yathasue traṃ yakṣendra sahā.

Having taken the ritual flower prepared in this manner and offered it, reciting once while fumigating with bdellium resin, one will become invisible.

This is the fourth chapter, the chapter on the ritual for accomplishing the maṇḍala, from the Inquiry of Yakṣa Nāṭeśvara, the Supreme Dancer.

Next, the ritual of the image-form shall be explained.

A piece of uncut, unhemmed cloth, free of hair, measuring four cubits on each side, is to be stitched together so as to be perfectly square. Using clean male pigments that are unmixed, and vessels made pure and clean, one should paint it in accordance with the practice of a skilled artist. In the center, the supreme dancer is to be depicted as follows: his complexion resembling saffron yellow in the bloom of youth; with four faces; his right face resembling a blue lotus; his left face resembling a conch shell in color; and his rear face having the hue of an indranīla gem, with slightly bared teeth, smiling in a gentle snarl. He is adorned with sixteen arms, ornamented with precious jewels. The right-hand sequence, in order, holds: a vajra, a wheel, a jewel, a lotus, a sword, a lasso, an arrow, and a battle-axe. The left-hand sequence holds, in order: a bell, a trident, a mongoose, a flower-spike, a banner, a skull-cup, a bow, and a fan. To his right and left are to be depicted: Brahmā, Vibhīṣaṇa, Maheśvara, and the Restorer. In the lower portion are to be depicted: Suvarṇaratnā, Pūrṇabhadra, the God of Strength, Ānandavardhana, Indrāṇī, Sarasvatī, Bala, and Mahābala, and additionally the great-miracled yakṣas. In the upper portion are to be depicted: divine sons and miraculous sages. Below are to be depicted the vidyādharas. Furthermore, everything is to be painted just as the ritual of the mantras prescribes. Making offerings before the image-form generated through the ritual that issues from all the secret mantras, one recites the mantra one thousand times. What is described here as the accomplishment is achieved by the mere recitation of it.

This is the fifth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of the supreme image-form, from the Inquiry of Yakṣa Nāṭeśvara.

Next, the chapter on the mantras shall be explained.

Namo Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Narakupārāya. Oṃ madanadna kuñjala svāhā.

Recite this fully seven times and offer lustral water.

Namo Bhagavati. Narakupārāya. Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Supatisaṃrakṣatu pa. Sudevoya. Motakṣaṃ. Paṣṭhaṃ. Varuṇasutra. Natakubera. Śotaragaṃ. Tarjovati. Bitiśava. Yu sarve guhyā rakṣantu maṇḍalana. Tadyathā. Amitimati li. Ruti ruti dyāna ranatakupara. Kuvaranasarakupara. Ājñāvayati. Tiṣṭha tiṣṭha. Matikramamama maṇḍala svāhā.

For binding the directions, binding the maṇḍala, and binding the boundary, recite this seven times over water or mustard seeds.

Namo Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Narakubārāya. Te saṃskrāṃta. Oṃ sarasa. Naṭa naṭa. Duti duti. Nada nada. Kubara jñāpayati svāhā.

Recite seven times and offer fumigation.

Namo Bhagavate. Narakuparāya. Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Oṃ hana hana. Jvala jvala. He he natakupārāya.

This is the mantra for the fire offering.

Namo natakupārāya. Oṃ kela kele. Kili jvalani. Khili jvālinī svāhā.

Recite seven times over mustard seeds and perform the ablution.

Namo natakupārāya. Oṃ hahi kari va kunti yakṣakupārya svāhā.

This is the mantra for touching. Recite it seven times.

Namo Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Natakupārāya. Oṃ turu turu. Puṣpati. Mura mura. Pāra pāra. Guhya natakupārya svāhā.

Praise this over flowers and recite seven times.

Namo natakupara. Vijaya. Prabhara. Kubārāya.

This is the mantra for the ritual cake. Recite it seven times and offer it.

Namo narakupārāya. Sarva vanati tāya. Oṃ kiri kiri. Kupira kupara. Tiṣṭha tiṣṭha. Śikhi svāhā.

This is the mantra for binding the crown of the head. Recite it seven times.

Namo narakubarasya. Oṃ curu curu. Duru duru. Kupara kāmaśarīraṃ. Sarva kulututi svāhā.

This mantra is for protecting oneself, protecting the supreme, and accomplishing all activities. Recite it twenty-one times over a cord, water, white mustard, ash, or bdellium resin.

This is the sixth chapter, the chapter on mantras, supremely accomplished from the tantra of Naṭakubara, the supreme dancer among yakṣas.

From here onward, the mudrā rites are to be explained. This is the supreme practice of Naṭakubara, the great conduct, the unsurpassed and supreme accomplishment.

Join the two palms together with the fingertips level, separate the two thumbs and little fingers, bend the two middle fingers back so that the two index fingers are wrapped around behind them. This mudrā is the great mudrā (mahāmudrā). It overwhelms others with great majesty. It is the rite of the great hero. It accomplishes all activities, torments all yakṣas, and perpetually summons them. It brings down planetary spirits and accomplishes all activities. It is called the mudrā of Naṭakubara. It accomplishes all activities.

Oṃ ṭaki kupara svāhā.

Interlace all the fingers, raise the two middle fingers upright like a vajra, and bind them at the crown of the head. This is the hammer mudrā, supremely arranged for accomplishing all activities.

Oṃ citi citi. Viciti mudgara hūṃ hūṃ.

Then, with all the fingers interlaced and bent as before in the vajra manner, touch the tips of the two index fingers together and curl them into a round shape. This is the essence mudrā, the great lord of yakṣas. It utterly expels all yakṣas, fire-spirits, nāgas, and malevolent beings of every kind.

Oṃ ruti svāhā.

From that same mudrā, bend the two index fingers inward, touch the tips of the two thumbs together, and extend them. This is the mudrā of the essence of all, and it accomplishes all activities with great efficacy.

Oṃ narate acaḥ hūṃ phaṭ.

Join the two palms together with the two middle fingers pressed flat together and remaining inside. This is the essence mudrā of all yakṣas and fire-spirits. It utterly destroys all planetary spirits, and whoever is merely bound by it, all will be shaken. If malevolent yakṣas and fire-spirits do not come swiftly, their eyes will burst and their heads will split.

Oṃ namastute. Śuddheśvarāya. Narakupara. Matumamata. Gaṇapati. Vaiśravaṇa. Sādhu hūṃ. Bhibidhi svāhā.

Interlace the fingers and make a fist, then open and raise the two thumbs, extend the two little fingers straight, and place them at the heart. This is the mudrā for making offerings to all gods, and it is the emanated mudrā for accomplishing all activities without fail.

Oṃ saramakukuka. Jvala jvala. Pralaṃbavajra hūṃ.

Separate and extend the two little fingers, curl the two index fingers into a round shape, and hold the two middle fingers like hooks. This is the mantra and mudrā for dispersal, and it accomplishes all activities common to the three secrets. When one recites the root mantra, all that one wishes in the mind will be accomplished immediately. It is called the essence mudrā of Naṭakubara, the unobstructed. Through it, all gods, nāgas, yakṣas, fire-spirits, and malevolent planetary spirits will sit before one and listen to one's commands.

Oṃ hara hara. Prahara svāhā.

The teaching of these remaining mudrās is for accomplishing all activities. In a clean place, wearing clean clothing, anoint both hands with sandalwood or bdellium resin, and then form the mudrā seals, whereupon all sentient beings will be brought to happiness.

This is the seventh chapter, the chapter on mudrās, from the tantra of Naṭakubara, the supreme dancer among yakṣas.

Namo ratnatrayāya. Narakupārāya. Vaiśravaṇasutāya. Tadyathā. Sagrāsya. Hili hili. Mili svāhā. Amuṃ śaṃsahi. Haraṇyanasugatebbhyo jābeyi sāsā lakara. Vaśamanaye svāhā.

The peaceful supplementary rite for this is as follows: fast for three days, make a stirring stick from the wood of a wish-fulfilling tree,

smear white mustard seed with one's own blood and burn one hundred and eight of them, and the one sought will come. Once the aim is accomplished, release the person. The mantra for releasing is: Apas rasa. Apara. Gaccha gaccha svāhā. Recite this over white mustard seed seven times and wash one's face with it, and all beings will become affectionate, and whoever sees one will fall under one's power. Recite seven times over flowers and fruit, and whoever is given them will fall under one's power. Recite twenty-one times over a clove of garlic, place it in the mouth, and whatever one says to whomever will bring that person under one's power. Whatever one requests will be given. Recite twenty-one times over one's hand, and whoever one touches will fall under one's power and give whatever is asked, and will do whatever one commands. Recite over white mustard seed and throw it at the head of a person one wishes to make follow, and that person will follow like a shadow. Recite over medicinal myrobalan and gold, place it in the mouth, and one will be victorious over all quarrels and disputes. Recite over costus root, form it into a ball, and enter the royal palace, and the king, the royal retinue, and all ministers will fall under one's power. Recite over bdellium resin and fumigate oneself, and one will be victorious over all enemies. Even a single recitation defeats all enemies. Recite over bdellium resin twenty-one times and fumigate, and it is the supreme and excellent means of bringing all under one's power.

This is the eighth chapter, the chapter on the noble practice of rites, from the tantra of Naṭakubara, the supreme dancer among yakṣas.

Namo naṭakuparasyayasya. Vaiśravaṇakupara. Mahāguhyagrīntasya. Divyamānavasatayasya. Atkrodhaṃ naṭakuparsya. Hṛdayā lavartīśatame apahanana. Sarobnana. Rarakavanam. Ronapanam. Brtanam. Mamanmanma. Trasanam. Tejanam. Stambhanam. Jambhanam. Mohanam. Sarvamitranana. Brathananam. Natantayubhaya. Namo Vaiśravaṇāya. Namo Virūpākṣāya. Namo Virūḍhakāya. Namo Dhṛtarāṣṭrāya. Namo Jvalitāya. Namo Yakṣagandhāya. Namo Maṇibhadrāya. Namo Pūrṇabhadrāya. Prapari. Sarvavidyā. Mantrapūjitāya. Pratayajvalita. Hṛdaya. Praharaprahara. Staya. Suvimaya. Maninīśa. Prabhāraṇa. Alaṃkṛtaśarīrāya. Sarvadevabhūjiti. Tadyathā. Candrāya. Sūrya. Skandhatārāya. Naṭakuparāya. Ehyehi. Brahmasadyāna. Devasya. Danevāyuvajñī. Varśiśa. Īśvaraṃ. Sarvadem amoghamantu. Āveśayantra. Mantrābaindu. Mārayāntu. Yadiyoccana. Śaṃghatopiyetidharmālośaghato. Abhāvaruṇalāya. Indrayogagatabhā. Tihagulogatibīsesomasapāry. Lokagati. Meghatatabunantakupara. Ākadhaya. Ākarṣaya. Bhagavan. Naṭakupar. Namusamca. Prakrapanirājñābhayati. Sarvanataśrīṃintita. Kṣinanti. Śamayānardzopī śipaleme. Namo nāgauttaraṇe. Vaiśravaṇa. Brdoyatiti śapala. Ahoyāpāyantu titayāṃ. Bho bho dhidhakupara madhomadha. Kupara kupara. Pupakupara. Hṛdakupara. Hudra hudra. Hana hana. Daha daha. Paca paca. Chinda chinda. Ha hanatakupara. Hi hinatakupara. Pūraya pūraya. Naṭapūra. Devatakubaṭa. Atstambhaya. Bho guhyagaṇa. Naṭanaṭa. Ha hūṃ ha hūṃ. Ṭiti ṭiti. Bhici bhici. Bhicitabhe svāhā.

The supplementary rite for this practice is as follows: fumigate with bdellium resin, and by mere recollection all the planets will descend. Recite twenty-one times over bdellium resin, then sit before it and recite the mantra one thousand times,

and wearing clean, pure garments, offer a white torma. When the thousand recitations are fully complete, the painted image will stir, blaze, and emit sounds, saying: "I, the supreme dancer, have acted; you, the mantra-holder, now recite the mantra of your siddhi!" The mantra-holder then offers ritual water.

These are the words of accomplishment for these practices. Recite the mantra over white mustard seed seven times, then scatter it throughout the middle of a city: it will descend, blessed with reverence, and rain will fall. The people of the world will destroy one another and none will be able to survive. If it is scattered into water, it becomes pacified. By mere recollection in the mind of a sword, it will blaze. Likewise, by merely touching a trident, a wheel, a sword, a club, or a hammer while mentally recalling the mantra and fumigating with bdellium resin, they will blaze. If an effigy in the shape of a person is fumigated with white mustard seed, that effigy will blaze. Likewise, by merely fumigating Brahmā, Śakra (Indra), the Great Powerful One, Indra, the Resting One, and the Great Black One and so forth with bdellium resin, all actions will blaze.

If one wishes to invoke into a vase, draw a maṇḍala, fill a vase with water, scatter flowers in the maṇḍala, fumigate with bdellium resin, and mentally recall the mantra — when it descends it will blaze. If one wishes to invoke into a mirror, draw a maṇḍala, scatter flowers, and fumigate with bdellium resin: the past, the future, and all that occurs in the present will be seen in the center of the mirror. For as long as one wishes — the realm of the gods, the realm of the Four Great Kings, the realm of Yama, the realm of the nāgas — whatever one thinks of in mind, that will be seen. Whatever ultimate outcome one desires at that time will also be seen, and the world will be perceived directly.

Likewise, if one wishes to invoke into a hammer, anoint the hammer with lac-tree sap, anoint the shoulder with sandalwood and saffron, and point it at the mirror: through this rite, everything will be seen.

Take the skull of a noble person (skt. sattva), wash it extremely thoroughly, polish it, rinse it with consecration water, and wash it with the five fragrances. Wash the inner surface of the skull with fragrant substances, and wash the crown of the skull with fragrant substances and white mustard seed. In the four corners of a square maṇḍala, place four vases filled with water. Place four vessels filled with torma as well. Scatter flowers and draw with the five colors. Then place four swords, four bowls, flowers, fruits, torma, and banners of the five colors to adorn the maṇḍala. Recite the mantra seven times over the skull as well. Place three skulls in the center of the maṇḍala, fumigate with bdellium resin, mentally recall the mantra, and strike three times with an acacia (Skt. khadira) peg: the skulls will blaze and water will be cast upon them. Whatever appeared in the mirror will likewise appear in the skull. The palace, retinue, dwelling, and all the heads of those present in the abode of the supreme dancer will be seen, and together with them one will speak, and every excellence will be bestowed. The coming and going of people will also be seen. Women, men, boys, girls, and so forth who commit the five heinous acts, those who defile the sacred Dharma, and those who are childish and ignorant will not be seen. Nor will these practices be accomplished by such persons. Thus the invoking of the mirror, the skull, and the hammer — all of these will be accomplished through supreme recitation.

Entering a charnel ground, one recites the mantra over white mustard seeds and fumigates with bdellium resin. When one strikes a drawing with white mustard seeds, a corpse will rise, and it is to be bound at the crown of the head with this mantra. To release it: having broken a jujube branch seven times, it will walk about and perform all tasks as one mentally directs. Whatever is asked of it, it will also speak. Scattering white mustard seeds that have been fully consecrated by mantra, whatever one scatters them toward will come to pass. Casting them at the gate of a king will bring the king and his entire retinue under one's power. Whenever needed, eight thousand of whatever is wished will be bestowed upon oneself.

This concludes the ninth chapter of the tantra of the supreme dancer among yakṣas, being the chapter on the examination of the three times through luminous vision.

From here onward, the near-essence is to be explained.

Namo Vaiśramaṇasya. Brdzumusalatriśūlaguśahastasya. Namaḥ sarvadevatāle. Bhūjita. Namastita sya. Mahākilikili sya. Sarvagagaraṇa. Yajjayata. Bhagavan. Nadeśubhavarasya. Yakṣitibarcita. Brahmaṇi kalakala. Natakuparkulakula. Kuparkupara. Dubhinbhankupara. Picirimpabhan. Bhagavana. Natakupara. Biṭitiratna. Drahaha bukarya kampāparidita Vaiśravaṇa. Vabhavimana. Pasinisutisuti. Kuparkupara. Natakupara. Namostu te svāhā.

This is the mantra of the near-essence and the ritual of enjoyment and use. If a brave man is fumigated with the smoke of bdellium resin, whether it touches him or not, it will come to pass. When fumigated with bdellium resin, mere recollection of the mantra will destroy all gateways of the asuras, all magical contraptions, and all spells. Fumigating with bdellium resin and reciting the mantra twenty-one times over white mustard seeds, then striking the dwelling of a nāga, will cause the nāga to be unable to withstand it. Striking a heap of material with white mustard seeds while applying the mantra seven times, then placing it at a nāga's dwelling, will cause the nāga to be unable to withstand it. If it is removed, there will be liberation. Applying the mantra twenty-one times over an iron phurba (ritual spike) will cause the adversary's retinue to be unable to withstand it. If one wishes to make the army of Vaiśravaṇa unable to withstand it, reciting the mantra twenty-one times over a bone phurba and fumigating with bdellium resin will make them unable to withstand it. If it is removed, there will be liberation. If one wishes to be freed from all planetary influences, fumigate with bdellium resin and strike. To destroy all epidemic illness, bind with a five-colored thread. If one wishes to undo a binding, fumigate with bdellium resin and strike. If one wishes to open doors and iron locks, recite one hundred and eight times. Fumigating with white mustard seeds and bdellium resin will cause nakedness to be transferred away. To disperse clouds, use the tip of a young bamboo shoot. To avert hail, use the tip of a Karaveera branch. Burning the seven seeds causes the nāga to bring rain suddenly. To drive away yakṣas, burn rice and sesame. If one wishes to ruin the beer of a beer-seller, burn the dregs and yeast of beer. Sesame oil will bring things under one's power. Recitation performed mentally will transfer poison. From a peacock's tail-feather, eight thousand tasks will be accomplished. Merely by arousing the near-essence of the supreme dancer, it will be accomplished.

When fumigated with bdellium resin, all activities will be accomplished — all supreme siddhis (spiritual attainments) are to be obtained through this, the unsurpassed. This concludes the tenth chapter, the chapter on the ritual of making use of the supreme dancer, and the accomplishment of mantra and mudrā.

Then the Blessed One said "Excellent!" to Vaiśravaṇa's son, the supreme dancer: "Excellent! Excellent! O lord of yakṣas, you have taught well, for the benefit of all sentient beings." The Blessed One having thus declared this, the gods, the nāgas, and

the yakṣas, the gandharvas (scent-eaters), the asuras, the garuḍas, the kinnaras (half-human beings), the great serpents (mahoragas), Śakra (Indra, king of the gods), the world-guardians, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, the Great God (Śiva), Suvarṇaratna, Pūrṇabhadra, and the rest all rejoiced, and praised what the Blessed One had declared.

This concludes the first tantra, the Royal Tantra of Universal Accomplishment Through Reading, concerning the practice of the great yakṣa general, the supreme dancer, the vidyā-king, and the accomplishment of siddhis. From the Indian master

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The text is a sūtra-style canonical composition introducing the scene of the "Mahāyakṣasenapatinarakuparka­kalpa," a ritual tantra connected to Vajrapāṇi as lord of yakṣas. The long enumeration in the middle is a roll-call of yakṣa commanders, most of whose names are either Sanskrit proper names transliterated into Tibetan or Tibetan semantic renderings of Sanskrit epithets; they are rendered here by their Tibetan meanings where transparent, and left as transliterations where they are clearly Sanskrit proper names (e.g., Aḍavaka, Pañcika, Bheśvara). The precise identification of several of these figures with known Sanskrit originals is uncertain, but the uncertainty does not affect the doctrinal or narrative content. "Restorer's Son" renders "ངལ་བསོ་བའི་བུ," which is an unusual epithet; its precise referent is unclear and may be a title or clan name rather than a literal description.  The name rendered "Comfort-Giver" translates ངལ་བསོ་པོ, literally "one who provides rest or relief," used here as an epithet or name for a great king figure addressed by the Blessed One; its precise identity in context is left as a proper name-epithet. The term འབར་བ is rendered "flaming spirits" throughout, following the standard identification of this class of beings with fire-associated supernatural entities. གར་མཁན་མཆོག, the "supreme dancer," is a title or name for the yakṣa king Sucandra; the Tibetan reflects a Sanskrit name such as Śubhacandra but the text here gives the title literally. The phrase སྙིང་པོ་མཆིས་ཏེ, literally "I have an essence," refers to a vidyā or dhāraṇī formula; this is the standard idiom for introducing such a text.  The term rendered "family of the Elephant of Benefit" translates a Tibetan phrase that appears to correspond to a Sanskrit term meaning something like "Nāgārjuna's family" or possibly "the Vājra-family of Pha-glan" — however in the tantric context of five-family systems the five families listed here (Tathāgata, Jewel, Lotus, Vajra, and this one) correspond to the standard five buddha-families, with the middle term "phan-glang" being an unusual rendering that may correspond to a Sanskrit term for the Karma or possibly Ratnasambhava family. The exact Sanskrit equivalent is uncertain and has been rendered descriptively.

The mantra syllables are transliterated as faithfully as possible from the Tibetan phonetic transcription. They represent Indic sound-sequences that do not always map transparently to standard Sanskrit vocabulary, and no attempt has been made to normalize or emend them; they are rendered as heard.  The mantra syllables in this passage present numerous philological difficulties. Sanskrit reconstructions are uncertain throughout, and the Tibetan transliteration represents a received oral tradition rather than careful phonological encoding. The renderings given follow the Tibetan syllable by syllable without imposing corrections.

The term rendered "bdellium incense" throughout is gugul, the fragrant resin Commiphora wightii, widely used in Indian ritual contexts.

The phrase "quartan fever" renders zhag bzhipa'i rims, literally "four-day fever," a standard Ayurvedic and Tibetan medical designation for a fever recurring on the fourth day, equivalent to the classical quartan ague.

The final sentence is syntactically incomplete in the Tibetan, ending mid-clause, indicating that the passage continues in the following section of the text.  The term rendered "wealth-spirit" for "ངལ་བསོ་པོ" literally means something like "one who rests" or "resting one," but in this ritual context it consistently refers to a specific spirit or deity figure associated with wealth and service — possibly a form of yakṣa or a deity of the Vaiśravaṇa class. The identification is not entirely certain from the text alone.

The phrase "supreme dancer" echoes the title of the larger text and likely refers to Vaiśravaṇa or a associated deity in his most exalted form.  The mantra passage is transliterated from Tibetan phonetic rendering of Sanskrit syllables and is reproduced as is, without grammatical reconstruction, as is standard for dhāraṇī and mantra sections in this literature.

The term rendered as "Indian fig wood" represents the Sanskrit vaṭa, the banyan tree, here transliterated in the Tibetan as ཝ་དའི་ཤིང.

The phrase rendered as "stick of oleander wood" transliterates karvīra in Tibetan phonetics, the Sanskrit name for the oleander or Nerium oleander plant, used in ritual contexts. Similarly, "Nepali citron" renders the Tibetan transliteration of a Nepali citrus variety used in rites.  The name rendered "Gatotkaca" translates the Tibetan གཏོགས་འདོད. This is uncertain; the Tibetan may be a phonetic corruption or abbreviation of a Sanskrit proper name in the original, but the reading here is tentative. The term could also be a descriptive epithet meaning something like "the one wishing to be included," though a divine name fits the context better alongside Brahmā and Śakra.

The substance called "savīra" (Tibetan ས་བི་ར) is a transliteration of an unidentified Sanskrit pharmacological term; it may refer to a mineral or herbal ingredient used in ocular preparations in the Āyurvedic tradition.

The phrase rendered "one who is taken into the speech of the holder" at the end of the gorocana section is syntactically compressed in the Tibetan and could also mean "one's words will be accepted by all the world"; the general sense is that the practitioner gains persuasive authority.  The mantra transliteration follows the Tibetan phonetics closely but the Sanskrit reconstruction is difficult; the transliteration here follows the Tibetan syllables as faithfully as possible, and the underlying Sanskrit is likely corrupt or represents a hybrid form. This is a common situation with dhāraṇī and ritual mantra passages in this genre.

The term rendered "the supreme dancer" throughout translates a Tibetan epithet corresponding to Nāṭeśvara, lord of dancers, who in this text appears to be a yakṣa deity presiding over the ritual. The text frames this as a visionary encounter in which the deity appears as a child.

"Red sorcery rite using red lacquer" renders a Tibetan phrase that may refer to a specific ritual technique whose precise nature is uncertain; the term for lacquer or red resin here is unusual in this context.  The term "male pigments" renders a technical term from ritual art specifying pigments prepared in a ritually pure manner associated with masculine substances, as opposed to mixed or contaminated pigments. This is a technical requirement in tantric iconographic manuals.

The name Vibhīṣaṇa renders the Tibetan གཏོགས་འདོད, which is an unusual Tibetan equivalent and could alternatively refer to a retinue deity whose identity is less certain; however Vibhīṣaṇa is a known attendant in the Vaiśravaṇa retinue and is the most likely identification here.

The term rendered "the Restorer" for ངལ་བསོ་པོ is uncertain; it may refer to a specific deity in the yakṣa retinue whose Sanskrit name would clarify the identification. This is noted as genuinely uncertain.  The term "fire-spirits" renders the Tibetan "bar ba," a class of supernatural beings associated with fire or flame. The precise identity of this class is somewhat variable across texts, but "fire-spirits" is chosen as the most descriptively faithful rendering in context.

The phrase "the three secrets" refers to the three esoteric aspects of body, speech, and mind, a standard tantric formulation.

The "wish-fulfilling tree" for the stirring stick is a translation of "smon pa can gyi shing," literally "a tree that has aspiration" or "a tree of the wishful." This likely refers to a specific species considered auspicious or magically potent in the ritual tradition; the precise botanical identification is not certain from the text alone.  The eighth chapter colophon marks the end of the chapter, after which a new dhāraṇī section begins; the prose instruction at the end of the passage bridges into what is clearly a continuation describing a further rite, hence the translation ends mid-sentence as the Tibetan does. The transliterated Sanskrit mantras throughout this section are phonetically rendered from Tibetan transcription and are partially opaque; the rendering follows the phonetic values of the Tibetan letters as faithfully as possible without emendation. Several terms within the mantra body such as "Brdoyatiti" and "Tihagulogatibīseso" are likely corrupt Tibetan transcriptions of Sanskrit originals that cannot be restored with confidence.  The passage lists several deity names in a sequence: Brahmā, Śakra (Indra), "the Great Powerful One," Indra again, "the Resting One," and "the Great Black One." The Tibetan reads: Tshangs pa, Brgya byin, Mthu bo che, Dbang po, Ngal bso po, and Nag po chen po. "Dbang po" is a synonym for Indra and may here distinguish a separate deity or aspect; "Ngal bso po" is less standard and may refer to a deity associated with rest or repose, possibly Viṣṇu in some enumerations. These identifications are consequentially uncertain in the absence of a commentary.

The phrase rendered "effigy in the shape of a person" translates bu don gyi gzugs, literally "an image made for a purpose" or "a proxy image," a technical term for a ritual substitute figure. The rendering "effigy" captures the ritual function adequately.  The long dhāraṇī passage is rendered in romanized reconstruction from the Tibetan phonetic transcription. These syllables represent Indic sound-values that the Tibetan orthography only approximates; no critically established Sanskrit text has been used to correct them, so individual phonemes may differ from any surviving parallel. The phrase translated as "a brave man" renders the Tibetan term for a hero or warrior-type and likely indicates a ritual specialist or an assistant of strong disposition. The "Vaiśravaṇa's army" (ངལ་བསོ་པོའི་དམག་སྡེ) is rendered by taking ངལ་བསོ་པོ as an epithet of Vaiśravaṇa (one who refreshes the weary), following the broader context of the tantra; this is a genuine point of interpretive uncertainty. The term rendered "bone phurba" literally means "a phurba of human bone," used as a ritual implement.  The names Suvarṇaratna (Nor bu bzang po) and Pūrṇabhadra (Gang ba bzang po) are names of specific yakṣa or deity figures appearing in the assembly list; they are rendered by their Sanskrit equivalents based on standard Tibetan-Sanskrit correspondence. The colophon line breaks off mid-sentence, as the passage ends there.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
