The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra called 'Showing All the Arrayed Buddha-fields by the Blessing of All the Tathāgatas, Beholding Sentient Beings' (Ārya-sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasattvavalokenabbuddhakṣetranirdeśanāvyūha-nāma-mahāyānasūtra)

Toh 721 in the Kangyur is a Mahāyāna sūtra known in Sanskrit as the Ārya-sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasattvavalokenbuddha­kṣetranirdeśanāvyūha and in Tibetan as Pakpa Deshин Shekpa Thamché Kyi Jingyilab Semchen La Sikching Sangyé Kyi Shing Gi Köpa Küntu, rendered in English as "The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra called Showing All the Arrayed Buddha-fields by the Blessing of All the Tathāgatas, Beholding Sentient Beings." The text belongs to the sūtra section of the Kangyur and opens in the classic manner of a buddha-word discourse, with the Buddha residing on Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa at the abode of the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, surrounded by a great assembly of arhats and bodhisattvas. Its central concern is the revelation of the arrayed pure buddha-fields made visible through the collective blessing and compassionate gaze of all the tathāgatas toward sentient beings. As a Mahāyāna sūtra, it thus celebrates the visionary splendor of the buddha-fields while emphasizing the saving power that flows from the unified grace of all awakened ones.

In the language of India: Ārya-sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasattvavalokenabbuddhakṣetranirdeśanāvyūha-nāma-mahāyānasūtra. In the language of Tibet: The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra called "Showing All the Arrayed Buddha-fields by the Blessing of All the Tathāgatas, Beholding Sentient Beings."

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling on Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa, at the abode of the noble Avalokiteśvara, in the jewel-treasury of divine gems, amid a profusion of blossoms, arranged upon divine lion thrones. The great Saṅgha of monks, consisting of some five hundred monks, were all without exception arhats, freed of all defilements, who had completely crossed to the far shore of the supreme faculty of all sentient beings. And all the bodhisattvas, dwelling in the awareness of great compassion, were without exception those held back by only one more birth, or two births, or three, or ten, or twenty, or thirty, or up to one hundred births — and all of them were dwelling at the eighth or tenth bodhisattva ground. Among them were the noble Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, Vimalapuṣpa, Ratnaśrī, Vidyutprabha, Vimalāloka, Candana, Amṛtaprabha, and so forth — seven hundred great bodhisattvas. All the laymen and laywomen present had received prophecy and had attained meditative absorption. Five thousand had assembled from various world-systems. All the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas had served the buddhas of former times and had witnessed hundreds and thousands of the miraculous displays of the Tathāgata. All the great yakṣinīs had attained bodhisattva wisdom, had received prophecy, and were irreversible in a matchless way — Vimalāloka, Prabhāvatī, Bhayaṃkarī, Śrīmatī, Harā, Śaṅkhinī, and others: eighty great yakṣinīs. And together with all the world-protectors — Śakra (Indra), Brahmā, Vaiśravaṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Ratnasādhu, and Pūrṇabhadra — all these were gathered there together.

Then, all of them, perceiving that the Tathāgata was seated upon the lion throne, offered worship to the Tathāgata out of the roots of their own virtue, with divine ornaments, garments, flowers, flower garlands, incense, perfumed ointments, and the sounds of music, and they made representations in his honor. Some among them circumambulated many hundreds of thousands of times and sang his praises.

At that very moment the Blessed One entered into the meditative absorption called "Dwelling in the Awareness of Great Compassion Directed toward All Sentient Beings." Through the power of that absorption, this great trichiliocosm of world-systems blazed with light, and every material form was pervaded by that radiance. Sentient beings who were blind gained sight and beheld forms with their eyes. Those who were deaf heard sounds with their ears. Those afflicted by sickness were freed from illness. Those without clothing obtained garments. Those who were mad regained mindfulness. Those whose bodies were impaired and whose faculties were incomplete obtained bodies and faculties that were fully complete. Those who were poor obtained wealth.

Sentient beings who lacked wealth, provisions, and enjoyments came to be endowed with wealth, provisions, and enjoyments. All sentient beings came to be possessed of every happiness, and all their wishes were completely fulfilled. Then all the sentient beings of this great trichiliocosm of world-systems were also stirred and urged, and they all came to the presence of the Blessed One in order to hear the Dharma. Those beings who had been born among the gods entirely abandoned divine pleasures, kept the buddha in mind, and came to the presence of the Blessed One in order to hear the Dharma. Those beings who had been born among humans also entirely abandoned human pleasures and came to the presence of the Blessed One in order to hear the Dharma. Those beings who had been born among nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, hungry ghosts, and flesh-eating spirits each individually recovered mindfulness of the buddha, came to dwell in loving-kindness toward all sentient beings, and, with body and mind at ease, came to the presence of the Blessed One in order to hear the Dharma. Those beings who had been born in the realms of Yama, within the pitch darkness of the deepest dark, also recovered their individual mindfulness for a brief moment through the power of the buddha, came to know one another fully, and were entirely liberated from that great darkness. All sentient beings came to dwell in loving-kindness toward one another and were freed from the proximate afflictions. Then this great earth trembled in six ways, rising and falling.

Thereupon, at that assembled gathering, the youthful Mañjuśrī was present and seated, and he said this to the great bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara: "Son of good family, the great assembly of bodhisattvas is fully manifest everywhere, and the omens of that great assembly are also fully manifest everywhere. Son of good family, the prophecies given to many tens of millions of billions of bodhisattvas are also fully manifest everywhere, and the omens of the great Dharma discourse are also fully manifest everywhere. Therefore, son of good family, the hopes of many tens of millions of billions of bodhisattvas will all be completely fulfilled, and they will attain great primordial wisdom. Son of good family, for this reason you must arouse compassion toward all sentient beings, and you must entreat the Tathāgata to establish them in benefit, happiness, and unsurpassed perfect awakening. Son of good family, in a future time, in a future age, there will arise sentient beings who commit misdeeds, who are impoverished, lowly, of poor complexion, thoroughly tormented by old age and sickness, with scanty enjoyments, with bodies not properly cared for, short-lived, of little intelligence, thoroughly tormented by attachment, aversion, and delusion. Son of good family, in order to teach the Dharma for their sake, obtain permission from the Tathāgata. Son of good family, for this reason you will long work for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of sentient beings, pacifying all illness, reversing all misdeeds, thoroughly pacifying all misdeeds, completely fulfilling all hopes, and bringing them all the way to unsurpassed nirvāṇa."

Then the great bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara, gazed in all ten directions and brought to mind as many Tathāgatas as there are grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā.

He bowed with his palms joined in the direction of the Blessed One, circumambulated three times, and prostrated with five limbs upon the ground. He then addressed the Blessed One in these words:

"Blessed One, in the last days and the last times there will arise sentient beings afflicted by old age, illness, death, and grief, oppressed by untimely death, of low condition, of poor complexion, of short life, of meager resources, and whose bodies are wholly without cultivation. These beings, through minds of miserliness and corrupt moral discipline, will destroy one another and will seize one another's wealth, resources, and prosperity, indulging in laughter, frivolity, dancing, and games. They will perceive what is impermanent as permanent and what is unpleasant as pleasant. Why is this so? Because, on that very basis and foundation, beings are harmed by non-virtues of many kinds, and are then reborn in the hells, in the realm of animals, and in the world of the Lord of Death. Blessed One, for this reason I wish to completely fulfill the welfare, remedy, happiness, and all the hopes of those beings, to bring them to attain the primordial wisdom of the Tathāgata, to cause them to be born in a buddha field, and to reverse all their misdeeds — and for these purposes I wish to beseech the Tathāgata. Blessed One, since there is nothing that the Tathāgata does not know, does not understand, does not see, has not heard, or does not fully cognize, I wish to hear teachings related to the Dharma. Having honored the buddhas of the past, and with all the many bodhisattvas endowed with wisdom in their nature, monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas (scent-eaters), asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras (half-humans), and great serpents who have assembled here and are without refuge and will find no return — I implore you, Blessed One, to please speak. Sugata, please speak."

Then all the members of the assembly who had arrived together also prostrated with five limbs upon the ground and with one voice spoke these words: "Blessed One, please speak well. Sugata, please speak well."

Then the Blessed One, having heard this supplication made two and three times and taken it deeply to heart, gazed in all ten directions, and with a voice that was melodious, pleasing, and delightful, addressed the great bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara in these words:

"Son of good family, there is a meditative absorption called 'The blessing of all the Tathāgatas, gazing upon sentient beings and revealing the array of buddha fields.' I myself, from the moment I first aroused awakening mind, heard this absorption in the presence of the Tathāgata called 'Displaying All Directions Like a Flower of Brilliance.' Son of good family, at the very moment of hearing the name of that meditative absorption, nine billion sentient beings attained the primordial wisdom of the Tathāgata, and all of them were then prophesied by those Tathāgatas to be born in various buddha fields. And I too received such a prophecy. Son of good family, through the divine knowledge of the Tathāgata, I declare that in former times a certain Tathāgata taught this Dharma exposition to all sentient beings in thirty-one instances.

In all of those instances as well, the ones who supplicated the Tathāgatas were none other than yourself, noble Avalokiteśvara, and Mañjuśrī the Ever-Youthful, together with the retinue of great bodhisattvas, and the assemblies of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen who were present at those times. Having heard it, they made images and performed offerings. Subsequently, many tens of billions of sentient beings received prophecies and attained bodhisattva meditative absorptions, and they came to go wherever they wished, to have all their hopes fulfilled, to be free from illness, to have their roots of virtue fully ripened, to abandon all obscurations, to be endowed with beautiful and lovely forms pleasing to behold, to be abundantly supplied with wealth, grain, storehouses, and treasuries, to be worthy of being openly praised by kings, princes, and ministers, to be worthy of being revered by all sentient beings, to be endowed with mindfulness and with wisdom, to possess unwavering faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, to be endowed with miraculous powers, and to be possessed of long life, fine complexion, majesty, and strength, replete with excellence in every respect. They came never to be parted from what they loved, and to be free from the suffering of separation from those they held dear. With these things in mind, son of good family, any son or daughter of good family who arouses a mind of supreme reverence toward the Dharma-teacher, and who, after prostrating with five limbs to this Dharma exposition, adorns it beautifully with flowers, incense, perfume, flower garlands, unguents, parasols, victory banners, and pennants, and then recites "I pay homage to the buddhas" while prostrating, and who applauds it with the words "Excellent," and who receives it, retains it, reads it, copies it, or has it copied — all such people will come to be endowed with many excellent qualities. Even in this very life they will be endowed with many excellent qualities: they will be beautiful and lovely, pleasing to behold, free from illness, long-lived, steady of mind, endowed with mindfulness, endowed with steadiness, and worthy of being openly praised, revered, and honored by all kings, all royal consorts, all princes, all ministers, all enemies, and all sentient beings. They will also come to have abundant wealth and possessions. The fragrance of sandalwood will arise from their mouths. Their eyes will become like the petals of a blue lotus. By day and by night they will come to behold buddhas and bodhisattvas. All obscurations, including the five acts of immediate consequence and the rest, will be exhausted. The gods will guard them. At the time of death they will behold buddhas and bodhisattvas. They will pass away free from envy and with their minds undistracted. After passing away, they will be reborn in the world-system of Sukhāvatī.

Son of good family, those who receive this Dharma exposition, honor it, copy it, have it copied, read it, make offerings to it, retain it, or merely hear its name — these I prophesy with a direct prophecy: they have seen me, honored me, made images of me, and made offerings to me. Therefore let them have no doubt regarding the awakening of a buddha.

Those in whose ears this teaching has resounded should also be regarded as bodhisattvas and honored accordingly. All the karmic obscurations that have arisen through the karmic maturation of former actions — such as an unattractive form, poverty, lack of intelligence, excessive craving, separation from loved ones, disruption of royal rule, headaches, lack of food, poor clothing, harm to body and mind, a bed that is uncomfortable to the touch, and wasting illness — all such karmic obscurations will be completely exhausted through the power of hearing this meditative absorption. And one should arouse the mind in this way: "Whatever sins and non-virtuous acts of many kinds I have accumulated against sentient beings in the past while wandering through cyclic existence — I confess each and every one of them. I will clear them away. I will not conceal them." One should arouse the mind with unwavering faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha. All the karmic obscurations that would deprive that son or daughter of good family of the fruit of prosperity — whatever sinful acts they have committed and accumulated against buddhas, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, hearers, solitary buddhas, and their own parents — all of these will be completely exhausted, and great lordly powers will be fully achieved.

All the karmic obscurations that would cause that son or daughter of good family to experience the suffering of hell, to be separated from loved ones, to become blind, to be born as a woman, to be born with ambiguous sex characteristics, or — through the power of jealousy, pride, and anger — to be reborn in the realm of Yama, among hungry ghosts, or in the animal realm: all of these will be completely exhausted. Therefore, son of good family, this meditative absorption is the source of all good qualities.

Son of good family, this Dharma exposition causes the teaching to endure for a long time. It guards, protects, and shelters those sons and daughters of good family; it fully perfects all their good qualities and all their hopes; it grants prosperity, lordly power, and great happiness; it brings all wishes and desires to complete fulfillment; it exhausts all karmic residues; it thoroughly pacifies untimely death, all evil dreams, and all illness; it grants victory in every battle; it increases longevity, beauty, strength, diligence, and might; it brings all yakṣas, spirits, humans, and non-humans under one's sway; and it thoroughly pacifies plague, poison, fire, and flood.

There exist foundation dhāraṇī secret mantras through which one attains the stages up to receiving a definitive prophecy. Sons and daughters of good family who listen to them, retain them, honor them, read them, copy them out, and have them copied — all of these qualities will be obtained by them.

Then at that very moment this great earth shook in six ways, and those who had gathered in the assembly offered flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, powders, unguents, and pairs of fine cloth to the body of the Tathāgata. They paid homage, saying "Excellent!" and addressed the Blessed One: "Excellent, excellent! What are those foundation dhāraṇī secret mantras?"

The Blessed One declared:

Namaḥ sarva-tathāgatānām. Tadyathā: buddhe, su-buddhe, buddha-mate, loke vi-loke loka, atikrānte, sattva-avalokini, sarva-tathāgata-adhiṣṭhāna-adhiṣṭhite, sarva-āśā-paripūrṇe, dyuti-na-dhare, nara-deva-pūjite, tathāgata-jñāna-dade, tathāgata-adhiṣṭhānena, sarva-loka ma-sukhī bhavatu, pūrva-karma-kṣāpayatu, rakṣa bhavatu, sarva-ye-bhyas tathāgata, adhiṣṭhānena svāhā.

O sons of good family, these foundation dhāraṇī secret mantras were proclaimed and blessed by thirty Tathāgatas. I too have now set them forth for the sake of all sentient beings — for their benefit, their happiness, their protection, their refuge, their shelter, and the complete pacification of all illness — and so that they may be born in buddha fields.

Friends, if anyone thinks to themselves, "How may I obtain all those qualities proclaimed by the Tathāgatas?" — that person should rise early in the morning and, with a mind of love for all sentient beings, with a mind of compassion, with a mind of loving-kindness, and with a mind that has entirely abandoned jealousy, pride, concealment, and anger, and with a one-pointed mind, should make vast offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, then pay homage to all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions. Holding in mind whatever aspiration one wishes, one should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times over flowers and offer them one by one to the Tathāgata. By doing so, all of that person's hopes will be completely fulfilled. They will behold a Tathāgata in dreams. Whatever excellent thing they desire, they will obtain. At the moment of death they will behold a Tathāgata. After passing away they will be reborn in the world-realm of Sukhāvatī. They will be endowed with long life, strength, radiance, and diligence. All their enemies will come under their sway.

When this dhāraṇī was taught, sixty thousand living beings attained patient acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena, and all of them were completely freed from all karmic obscurations and all their aspirations were perfectly fulfilled.

Then the great bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi looked out toward the ten directions and addressed the Blessed One thus: "Blessed One, there is a dhāraṇī called the Majestic Splendor of the Fearless Pledge of the Bodhisattvas. I have received and held it in the presence of the Tathāgata Fearless Array, Splendid King. Having received it, I have also taught it to all sentient beings. Blessed One, henceforth I sincerely wish that for any person into whose ear this dhāraṇī resounds or penetrates — there shall be no place for physical weakness or manifold mental afflictions, for fever, epidemic disease, bodily exhaustion, anguish of mind, untimely death, fear of water, fear of weapons, fear of poison, fear of poisoning, fear of ḍākinīs and spirits, fear of yakṣas, or assault, harm, or injury by enemies, humans, or non-humans. Therefore, Blessed One, please grant me your permission. For the sake of those who teach the Dharma and those who listen to the Dharma, for the sake of those who listen, those who make images, and those who make offerings —"

— and to fulfill all the hopes of those who hold it, and to bestow upon bodhisattvas the mudrā of their vows.

Namas sarvatathagatānām. Sarvabodhisattvānām. Arhatām. Tadyathā: Oṃ vajradhara, vajrakāya, vajrabala, vajrateja, hūṃ hūṃ, vajrapāṇi, tathāgatājñāmapālaya, smara pratigyām, sarvabyādhīna sarvapāvāna nāśaya, dehi me, yathaivasitam avara ma, yanayame abhiprāya nāyācami tantan me va samṛddhatu, he he, turu turu, āgaccha āgaccha māvilamba, darśaya, vajrakāyam, darśaya, vajrakāyam, buddha adhiṣṭhānena svāhā.

When this dhāraṇī is recited, this great earth trembles and heaves. All yakṣas and rākṣasas are utterly terrified. All the gods, humans, and those between gods and humans are filled with wonder, and the assembly exclaims, "Excellent! Excellent!" at these being set forth — these dhāraṇī secret mantras that are the foundation for the great accomplishment of sentient beings.

Then the bodhisattva, the great being Vajrapāṇi addressed the Blessed One with these words: "Blessed One, whoever desires the bodhisattva grounds, or wealth, or grain, or mastery over enjoyments, or mastery over a royal kingdom, or the holding of vidyāmantra, or long life, vitality, good complexion, diligence, and longevity — such a person should first undertake the preliminary practice, and on the eighth day of the waxing moon, he should cause a holder of the vajra fashioned from white sandalwood to be placed as a stake marker, adorned with every ornament, with a relic placed at the heart. Having caused the vajra-holder bearing the relic to breathe out the vidyāmantra properly, and having fumigated it with pure fragrant incense, he should perform a one-pointed fast under a single parasol. Then from the eighth day to the fifteenth, at a pure place where a Tathāgata image is present, he should make a maṇḍala of white sandalwood, and also set in place four full vases. In each of the four directions, he should offer tasty food, fragrant offerings, liquid libations, and torma cakes of milk-porridge, and having dressed in white cloth and made his mind one-pointed, three times each day he should make great offerings of incense, flowers, fragrant substances, and lamps. He should also make offerings to the Tathāgata, and having paid homage to the Tathāgata, he should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times over one hundred and eight red lotus flowers, and one by one press them against Vajrapāṇi. Thereupon a great sound will arise, the earth will shake, and rays of light will also appear. Following that, whatever excellent thing is desired will be granted. By the mere performance of recitation, all activities and all purposes will be perfectly accomplished. He will be free from illness, will live long, will be freed from all evil, and will also attain a thousand excellent qualities. At the time of death he will behold a thousand buddha Blessed Ones. And you, Blessed One, will also grant me the vision of yourself."

Then the Blessed One said "Excellent!" to Vajrapāṇi: "Excellent, Vajrapāṇi! Excellent! This mudrā is not to be transgressed by the world together with its gods. Toward it there should be no suspicion, no second thought, no doubt."

Then Mañjuśrī the Ever-Youthful addressed the Blessed One with these words: "Blessed One, why is this meditative absorption called 'Blessed by All Tathāgatas, Gazing upon Sentient Beings, Revealing the Adornment of All Buddha Fields'?" The Blessed One declared —

— through the blessing of all the Tathāgatas and the blessing of all bodhisattvas, one will attain all meditative absorptions and all gateways of dhāraṇī. Moreover, one will come to know fully the minds and mental factors — both the subtly moving and the overtly moving — of all sentient beings: gods, nāgas, humans, yakṣas, gandharvas (fragrance-eaters), hungry ghosts, those born in animal destinies, and all sentient beings in the world of the Lord of Death. One will know which of these sentient beings are drawing near to merit — performing virtuous actions and deeds of good conduct — and will come to gain faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha. And knowing which of them are heading toward the hells — performing harmful actions, engaging in wicked conduct, and having fallen into wrong views — one will teach the Dharma to those sentient beings, turn them away from all wickedness, establish them in the awakening of a buddha, bring all their aspirations to complete fulfillment, dispel their jealousy, pride, anger, and miserliness, and cause those very sentient beings to fully attain faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, so that they are born in buddha fields and never again experience suffering or discomfort.

Therefore, son of good family, this meditative absorption is called "Blessed by All Tathāgatas, Gazing upon Sentient Beings, Revealing the Adornment of All Buddha Fields." Sentient beings who merely hear it will attain the ground of irreversibility, certain of never turning back.

Then Mañjuśrī asked: "Blessed One, for what reason will those sons of good family and daughters of good family receive a prophecy? Blessed One, even arhatship is difficult to attain — how much more so is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening unattainable — so how great will be the accumulation of merit and the austerities they must undertake?"

The Blessed One declared: "Son of good family, reckoning from when I first aroused the awakening mind up to now, all that I perfected of the perfection of generosity, the perfection of moral discipline, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of wisdom; all that I gave away — my head, hands, feet, eyes, body, beloved sons, daughters, wives, male servants, and female servants — in order to accumulate merit and to accumulate roots of virtue: all that former accumulation of merit and roots of virtue does not come within even a hundredth part of the accumulation of merit gained by one who honors, venerates, copies, has copied, reads, and retains this Dharma teaching, who teaches it rightly to others, who thus accumulates merit, and who also honors and venerates the preachers of the Dharma.

Son of good family, I have brought all those teachings I have explained to fulfillment, and as for whatever merit is accumulated by one who honors, venerates, portrays in images, makes offerings to, reverences, copies, and has copied all those teachings — compared to that, whoever copies this Dharma teaching, has it copied, reads it, makes offerings to it, teaches it rightly, and has others listen to it will accumulate far greater merit in abundance.

It is for this reason that the Tathāgata bestows upon them a prophecy of unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening. And why is that? Because the merit of listening to, retaining, holding, reading, making offerings to, copying, and having copied this Dharma teaching is so difficult to come by.

Son of good family, those sentient beings who constantly engage in wrongdoing, who are given to eating and drinking and are exceedingly fond of dance and revelry, who perceive the unpleasant as pleasant, who are full of desire, anger, and ill will, who perceive suffering as happiness, who delight in weapons, quarreling, threats, and blows, who do not come to understand, who do not take things to heart — these beings are held fast by that basis of evil action and by that ignorance; they are held fast by unwholesome companions and are entirely seized by aging, sickness, sorrow, and death, so that at the moment of dying they are utterly tormented. When they look about, they see nothing but what resembles a charnel ground on every side. They will not generate a virtuous mind, nor will they attain unshakeable faith. And when they pass away from that state, they will continue to experience suffering. Because they lack virtuous roots from which a prophecy might spring, because they have not seen a Tathāgata, and because they have not received a prophecy, such beings are incapable of listening to this Dharma teaching, having it painted in images, making offerings to it, retaining it, copying it, or having it copied; nor are they capable of placing faith in it. They are equally incapable of honoring, venerating, having painted, or making offerings to the teacher of the Dharma.

Son of good family, in whatever land this Dharma teaching comes to be practiced and spread, the activity of the Tathāgatas will arise there.

Then the assembled retinue present there said to the Blessed One, "Excellent! Blessed One, we too shall honor, venerate, have painted, and make offerings to that teacher of the Dharma and to those who listen to the Dharma, doing so with the activity of a Tathāgata, and we shall provide them with every article of comfort and wellbeing. We shall propagate this Dharma teaching widely and protect it, so that it may long endure."

Then at that moment the Blessed One gazed upon the assembled retinue present there and declared: "Excellent! Excellent, sons of good family! Do exactly as you have said. Even if you face harm, contempt, abuse, threats, drawn weapons, or opposition, pay no heed to body or life, but listen to this Dharma teaching, write it out, have it copied, and read it. And attend upon that teacher of the Dharma with every article of comfort and wellbeing. Guard that region, that continent, and those cities against fears, harms, epidemic disease, and strife. And keep those sons of good family and daughters of good family constantly in your thoughts."

Then at that moment the Blessed One spoke these verses:

In countless thousands of millions of eons
a buddha arises only on rare occasions.
So that in future times you will have no regret,
sons of good family, listen to the Dharma with care.

Those who hear its qualities and bring forth genuine faith
will not find it difficult to attain meditative absorption.
One who, for as many eons as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
makes offerings to the foremost among two-footed beings —

than one who offers wealth and grain, and likewise
fine garments and jewels,
incense and garlands and perfumed ointments —

whoever places genuine faith in this sūtra,
listening to it, reciting it, and having it written down:
that person's merit is beyond all measure,
and the Sugata has declared it to be immeasurable.

Always be heedful and frequent secluded places;
with undistracted mind, cultivate pure meditative concentration.
Greater than one who gives beloved sons and daughters,
or who gives away hands and feet entirely,
is whoever holds this sūtra —
that person will accumulate far greater merit.

This supreme sūtra bestows the gift of wealth,
and all lower rebirths are forever abandoned by it.
This is the giver of wealth and grain:
whoever holds this pure sūtra
will find that no quality is scarce for them,
and their life, strength, and diligence will be unimpaired.
They will behold the guide, the buddha Amitābha,
and I will prophesy their awakening as a buddha.
Never will any sin be found in them,
and they will behold the world-realm of Sukhāvatī.

Whatever difficulties continually arise for that person —
anguish of mind, illness of body,
or likewise constant headaches — all will be exhausted,
and they will never suffer a downfall.
In this very visible life they will attain all good qualities
just as they have wished and desired.

Thus always — monks and nuns,
male and female lay practitioners, and kings alike —
should revere those who teach the Dharma,
honoring them as one honors a Tathāgata, the sovereign among humans.
This sūtra should always be held,
and those who hold it should always be served with reverence.
With incense and garlands and perfumed ointments
render them honor, and have it written down.

In future times, afflicted by old age,
distracted and tormented by thousands of conflicts,
wandering through the hell realms and among the hungry ghosts,
suffering the disgrace of being called food-thief and wretch,
blind, carrying the stench of corpses and dogs,
born among women of low caste —
greatly envious, ever committing misdeeds,
overwhelmed by anger, always miserly —
because of failing to show reverence to the Dharma of the buddhas,
one is born into such conditions,
experiencing the sensation of suffering there,
and being tormented in future times as well.

Therefore those who hold and teach this sūtra
should always be venerated.
Whoever harasses, reviles, strikes, or imprisons them —
that person has harassed and treated me likewise.
Whoever pays homage to those who hold it
has done so to me as well.
Therefore those who teach the Dharma,
and whoever holds, writes, and recites this sūtra —
these people should always be served with reverence,
and gentle and pleasant words spoken to them continually.

Then the great bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara, touched his head to the feet of the Blessed One and addressed the Blessed One with these words:

Blessed One, I recall possessing a dhāraṇī called the Magical Display of Views. In former times I heard and received it in the presence of the Tathāgata named Luminous Wisdom-Pinnacle. Having heard, received, memorized, and recited it, having proclaimed it to others, revered it, and had it written down or arranged to have it transcribed — by such action one will attain the stage of non-regression, one will attain all the qualities the Tathāgata has declared, all that one has wished for will be perfectly accomplished, all karmic obscurations will be purified, meditative absorption will be attained, afflictions of the bile will be overcome, the vision of the buddhas will be gained, and —

— bodhisattvas too will be seen."

Then the Blessed One uttered words of praise to the bodhisattva great being, the noble Avalokiteśvara, saying "Excellent!" He said: "Well done, well done, O son of good family! The Tathāgata has already blessed you — now speak!"

Then the bodhisattva great being, the noble Avalokiteśvara, paid homage to all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions and recited these words that form the foundation of the secret mantra:

Namaḥ sarva-tathāgatānām. Sarva-āśā-paripūrakāṇām. Nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya. Bodhisattvāya. Mahāsattvāya. Mahākāruṇikāya. Tadyathā: ha ha ha, ma ma ma, dhiri dhiri dhiri, śānte, praśānte, sarva-pāpakṣayaṃkari, avalokāya, kāruṇika, bodhicittam mama nasikuru, jyāvalokāya, māmam, smara smara, yantavā pūrve, satya-adhiṣṭhānaṃ kṛtena, tena satyena, vacanena, sarva-āśā me paripūraya, buddha-kṣetra ma-pariśodhaya, mame kaścid vihethāṃ karotu, buddha-adhiṣṭhānena svāhā. Tadyathā: teje teje, mahāteje, yan mama kāya-duścaritam abā, vāg-duścaritam abā, mano-duścaritam abā, dāridryam abā, tat sarvaṃ kṣāpaya, alokaya, vilokaya, tathāgata-darśanañca, aham adhikāṃ kṣāmi bodhi-satya-darśanam, dhu dhu ma, daddasvame darśanam, sarva me kuśala, abhivardhantu. Namaḥ sarva-tathāgatānām. Nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya. Bodhisattvāya. Smara pratijñāṃ mama satva. Sidhyantu mantra-padāḥ svāhā.

When this dhāraṇī was recited, the great earth shook mightily, a great sound like thunder rang out, and a rain of divine flowers descended in abundance.

The entire assembly, complete in all its members, uttered words of praise: "Well done, well done, O great being! For the sake of protecting all sentient beings — fulfilling all their wishes, guarding them from all fears, purifying all karma, and utterly pacifying all harm from hostility and from evil dreams — you have spoken this dhāraṇī well. All of us too shall uphold, honor, and serve it."

Avalokiteśvara then spoke: "O sons of good family, whoever wishes to obtain the qualities that the Tathāgata has fully proclaimed — to receive prophecy, to see me directly face to face, to attain meditative absorption, to behold buddhas and bodhisattvas, to obtain prosperity and sovereign power, and to be reborn in a buddha-field — that person should, during the waxing fortnight of the month, bathe their body well, be clean and pure, observe the precepts, abide by the noble eightfold discipline, and, beginning from the eighth day, make offerings of incense, flowers, victory banners, flags, and filled vases both to that place consecrated by the blessing of the Tathāgata and to the Dharma-teacher who expounds it there. Having bathed their body well and being clean, they should dress in white garments, offer flowers, burning incense, perfume, flower garlands, and various ointments, and then set about writing the text down. While writing, each day without exception they should make all their roots of virtue common to all sentient beings, hold the Tathāgata as their highest teacher and cultivate a mind of reverence, and with a mind of loving-kindness, affectionate care, and compassion toward all sentient beings, they should write only until midday."

From the eighth day through the fifteenth day of the lunar month, offerings should likewise be made each day without exception. If one writes the text following precisely this ritual procedure, all karmic obscurations including the five acts of immediate retribution and all other misdeeds will be purified without delay, the roots of virtue will grow, and diligence will blaze forth. In that very lifetime one will attain physical well-being, and attachment, aversion, delusion, pride, anger, envy, and miserliness will all become thin and weak.

Having had the text written out, one should place an image of the Tathāgata with relics and an image of Avalokiteśvara with relics at a stūpa site that contains relics, with their faces turned to the east. One should then make vast and extensive offerings of flowers, burning incense, perfume, and lamps. From the eighth day through the fifteenth day of the lunar month, one should arouse a mind of great compassion toward all sentient beings, eat pure and wholesome food, observe the vows of retreat, abide by the noble eightfold path, keep company with trustworthy companions, and completely abandon pride, anger, envy, and miserliness. Each day one should make great and extensive offerings, and at the three times of day one should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times. Flowers, burning incense, perfume, and lamps should also be offered. At the three times of day, one hundred and eight fresh flowers should be scattered upon the image of the noble Avalokiteśvara, and Vajrapāṇi should be honored with fumigation of burning incense. After prostrating to all ten directions, one should present torma offerings of varied and diverse flavors to the goddess of the west, the incomparable goddess of the east, and the conch-bearing goddess of the upper direction and others in the four directions, along with milk porridge, yogurt, rice cooked with milk, and other such offerings. By doing so, no distraction or fear of any kind whatsoever will arise, and the mind will not go astray. After reciting the mantra one hundred and eight times over each of the one hundred and eight fresh flowers, one should invoke the deity with them. Having first performed the retreat in just this way according to this very ritual procedure, then on the morning of the fifteenth day, one should place four full vases in that sacred place, set out burning incense, sandalwood, white mustard seed, and camphor, place four lamps, and adorn the site beautifully with flowers, burning incense, parasols, victory banners, silken cloths, and various pennants, and with vessels of gold and silver. Milk porridge mixed with honey, yogurt, rice cooked with milk, and whatever other divine food-offerings and torma can be obtained should be placed in the four directions. The one hundred and eight fresh flowers should each have the mantra recited over them once, as before, and then be cast into the four directions. After that, the mantra should be recited once over each of three sets of one hundred and eight fresh flowers, and each flower should be pressed against the image of the noble Avalokiteśvara one by one. The image will then move, a great sound and voice will arise, rays of light will appear, and the earth will tremble. Thereafter all activities and all aims will be accomplished, the Tathāgata will be seen, the bodhisattva grounds will be attained, and one will become worthy of the reverence of all sentient beings. Wealth, grain, treasuries, and storehouses will become abundant. All illness will be completely abandoned and long life will be attained. All enemies, as well as kings, princes, and ministers, will come to wish to look upon that person and will hold them dear. All afflictions, attachment, aversion, and delusion will be abandoned.

One will never be parted from what is dear. One will be possessed of stability, power, and great diligence; possessed of majesty; possessed of keen faculties; possessed of intelligence; possessed of a mind full of loving compassion toward all sentient beings; and knowledgeable in ritual procedures. At the time of death, one will see the buddhas, the Blessed Ones, and will also see the noble Avalokiteśvara. One will pass away while abiding in loving-kindness and teaching the Dharma.

One will be born in whatever buddha field one wishes, or in the great lineage of a wheel-turning king, or wherever one holds in mind with longing — and beyond that, one will attain many hundreds of thousands of qualities.

Then someone asked: Blessed One, this being so, this enumeration of Dharma teachings and this foundation of dhāraṇī secret mantras is a source of many qualities. Yet without the blessing of a Tathāgata, this enumeration of Dharma teachings cannot readily be heard, cannot readily be taken up, cannot readily be read aloud, cannot readily be revered, cannot readily be written down, cannot readily be caused to be copied, and cannot readily be believed in. Even if one were to encounter it, one would not come to hear it; and even if one were to come to hear it, one would hear it with a distracted mind and would not come to have faith, would not come to pay homage. Even if one were to pay homage, one would do so with a mind accompanied by affliction and ill will. And even if one were to copy it or cause it to be copied, one would do so for the sake of others' purposes. Why is this? It is because this is the fruit of that person's prior karma: they will experience that karma, and doubt will arise in them. Yet even one who has committed the five acts of immediate consequence will, if they accomplish this three times, have all their hopes completely fulfilled — provided they act without hesitation, without ambivalence, and without generating doubt.

Then the Blessed One said "Excellent!" to the bodhisattva, the great being, the noble Avalokiteśvara: "Excellent, excellent, son of good family! This enumeration of Dharma teachings will perform the deeds of a Tathāgata for all sentient beings."

Then the great yakṣiṇī Apratimā went to where the Blessed One was, approached him, made offerings with flowers, incense, various perfumes and incenses, and pairs of fine cloth, touched her head to the Blessed One's two feet, and addressed the Blessed One in these words: "Blessed One, I call to mind the pledge I once made in the presence of the Blessed One, while he was dwelling in the Priyadarśanā garden in the land of Kauśāmbī, for the benefit, healing, and well-being of all sentient beings. Blessed One, we too request the essence-mantras of all vidyā-holders. Therefore, Blessed One, please accept us as your charge, so that healing for the many, happiness for the many, and the complete fulfillment of all hopes may come about — for the sake of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen alike."

Namas sarvatathāgatānām. Syād yathedanam. Ha ha. Hi hi. Hu hu. Sara sara. Lahūṃ lahūṃ. Śīghraṃ. Mahāvidyā. Sarvavidyādharanamas kṛte. Hasa hasa kiṃ tiṣṭhasi. Kiṃ kiṃ tiṣṭhasi. Kanakavicitram. Āvaraṇavibhūṣitāṃge. Paṭa paṭa. Bhara bhara. Bhiri bhiri.

Bhuru bhuru. Sarva arthane me sādhaya. Turu turu. Arthane sādhaya. Arthane dehi me. Sarva satvānāna siddhin. Hā hā. Padme. Padme. Mahāpadme. Viṣade. Viṣade. Mahāviṣade. Bhava bhava. Bhavodbhavāya. Tamahāṃ ghore. Tanme vidyām aprayojanāya. Siddhi kuru. Sarva āśāme paripūraya. Buddha adhiṣṭhānena svāhā.

Blessed One, for one who seeks various qualities, or who seeks wealth and grain, or who wishes to bring all sentient beings under one's sway, or who seeks great lordship over wealth, or sovereignty over a kingdom, or the status of a great vidyā-holder, or who wishes to behold me directly in person — such a person, on the eighth day of the lunar fortnight, having engaged a clean artist who is observant of the pure code of the noble eightfold path, shall lay out a new, uncut white cotton cloth stretched flat with no creases, and with the hair groomed. Then, offering clean pigments in a new, uncontaminated vessel, one shall paint in the center a form of the Tathāgata seated in the manner of one teaching the Dharma. To the right shall be painted the noble wrathful vajra-bearer Rādha in white, adorned with every ornament — with garlands of flowers, a crescent moon, and bracelets — holding a vajra and present in a radiant form. To the left shall be painted the great female yakṣa Apratimā, of a pale white hue like the color of a reed arrow in flight, in white Rādha form, adorned with every ornament, holding a lotus in her hand and depicted in the manner of one who grants relief.

Then the vidyā-holder, having remained pure, observing the noble eightfold path, dressed in white, accompanied by companions, and having prepared barley mixed with milk, shall first perform the preliminary approach practice. On the umbrella of the eighth day, in a pure place containing relics of the Tathāgata, one shall offer flowers, incense, and pure perfume first to the Tathāgata and then to Vajrapāṇi. In the four directions one shall scatter offerings of rice-porridge, yogurt, rice with barley, dishes of various flavors, and torma cakes of various grains. Having made offerings of flowers, incense, perfume, and various lamps, at each of the three times of day one shall recite the mantra three hundred and eight times over three hundred and eight individual flowers, and with each recitation press the flower against the image of the great female yakṣa Apratimā.

Then on the fifteenth day of the new moon one shall again perform this same ritual, and furthermore offer whatever is available along with incense, camphor, white mustard seed, sandalwood, and musk-root. One shall also offer sesame oil scented with grain-infused fragrance, poured from a vessel with two openings. Then I myself shall be present there in my own form and shall grant whatever sacred boon is desired — the attainment of meditative absorption, journeying through the sky, making the body invisible, sovereignty over a kingdom, rulership through the wheel of power, the status of a vidyā-holder, sight of treasures, transmutation of metals, knowledge of others' minds, long life, and whatever sacred boon is wished — all these I shall bestow. The practitioner, moreover, shall cultivate a mind of loving-kindness toward all sentient beings and a mind that has utterly abandoned pride, anger, jealousy, and miserliness. One shall completely give up stealing the wealth of stūpas, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, and shall hold unwavering faith in the Tathāgatas.

Blessed One, if even one who commits a boundless transgression performs this practice three times and I do not grant the boon, may I, the Blessed One, fail to attain full, perfect, unsurpassed awakening. And if one who has lost faith in the buddhas —

— and those who are of two minds, and those who, having performed sinful and non-virtuous deeds, feel no remorse, and those who possess minds afflicted by afflictions and secondary afflictions — to these as well I shall grant the vision of myself, and I shall bring it about that they attain it.

Then the Blessed One said "Excellent!" to the great yakṣa queen Apratimā: "Sister, excellent, excellent! Sister, for the sake of all sentient beings, that you have spoken these mantra foundations in this way to those sentient beings who engage in every manner of sin, and that you have made this pledge — this too is excellent of you. With great compassion such as this, you shall be able to establish all sentient beings in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Do you, therefore, act accordingly."

Then the great goddess Śaṅkhinī offered worship to the Blessed One with various flowers and various incenses, circumambulated him, touched her head to the feet of the Blessed One, and addressed the Blessed One in these words: "Blessed One, I too, through the blessing of the Tathāgata, pledge to make the teaching of the Tathāgata endure for a long time, and to protect those who teach the Dharma. I shall bestow the mantra foundations that fulfill all wishes completely. Therefore, Blessed One, I beseech you to grant me permission."

Namas sarvatathagatānām. Tadyathā: oṃ śaṅkhini devi, āgaccha āgaccha, tiṣṭha dhane, dhanajaye, bri bri, briddhikari, dhri dhri, dhritikari, nānā-vividha veśavasta, āyudhādhāriṇi, yu yu āyuṣpālane, tathāgatānāṃ smara bodhicittam, mā vilamba, dehi me varan, śaṅkhini svāhā.

"Blessed One, if these mantra foundations are kept upon the body, the person's renown shall increase, their splendor shall increase, their wealth shall increase, their lordship shall increase, their life shall be long, and their mastery over enemies shall increase. One should offer torma cakes in all four directions in a pure place or a divine abode with whatever is available, should make extensive offerings to the Tathāgata with incense and white grain, and should also offer clarified butter. Remaining in loving-kindness on the twenty-first night of the lunar month, and while steadfast, if one recites the mantra one hundred and eight times, all the wishes of those who have not abandoned the sacred Dharma shall be completely fulfilled."

Then the Blessed One and the entire assembled retinue said "Excellent!" to the great goddess Śaṅkhinī: "Sister, excellent, excellent! This pledge, endowed with so many qualities, has been well-spoken. Sister, in the future, act accordingly."

Then the great goddess Bhīṣaṇā offered worship to the Blessed One with golden flowers, touched her head to the feet of the Blessed One, and addressed the Blessed One in these words: "Blessed One, I too shall bestow the mantra foundations that fulfill all wishes for those who teach the Dharma, for those who listen to the Dharma, for those who copy it in writing, for those who hold it, read it, and make offerings to it — granting them wealth, jewels, pearls, prosperity, lordship, royal sovereignty, and long life, and bringing all enemies under control — for kings, or queens, or monks,

or nuns, or laymen, or laywomen — whoever holds it, reads it, pays homage to it, copies it in writing, has it copied in writing, and with supreme reverence performs the practice exactly as it has been taught — Blessed One, I shall protect such a person, utterly sustain them, and grant them whatever supreme thing they desire. I shall see that they are never troubled by losses of wealth or power. I shall grant them victory over strife, conflict, bloodshed, and turmoil. I shall bring about for them a life that is perfectly abundant. Their country and their cities, too, I shall utterly protect. Therefore, Blessed One, I beseech you to grant me your permission."

Namas sarvatathagatanana. Sarvabodhisattvanana. Nama Aryavalokitesvara. Vajrapani-prabhrtinana. Tadyatha: Om mahādevi, bhime bhimamante, jaye jayā vaheya-sobhavati, yaso-jave, teja-jave, vyakarana-prapate, sarvasattva-avalokite, krpate-japa-hule, tathagata-anujnatam palaya, smara pratijnam, buddha-adhisthanena, dehi me varam, siddhim kuru, devi mahadevi satya-vacane, devi bhima-satya-vacane, pratisthite guhya-nivasini, svaha.

"Blessed One, for the sake of all sentient beings I have spoken these mantra foundations, blessed by the Tathāgata and permitted by the Tathāgata. Having made offerings before the Tathāgata with flowers, incense, perfume, and lamps, and having scattered in the four directions torma offerings of rice porridge rich with varied flavors — if one mentally holds whatever wish one desires and recites the mantra one hundred and eight times as an act of worship, all those various wishes will be completely fulfilled.

"Whoever wishes to behold my very form in person: on the eighth day of the month, on the canopy of an umbrella, let a pure painter who has observed the noble eightfold precepts apply pigment that has not been mixed with blood onto a clean new piece of white cloth whose edges have not been folded and whose surface has not been touched by hair. In the center let him paint the image of the Tathāgata seated in the manner of one who teaches the Dharma. To the right let him paint the noble Avalokiteśvara expounding words connected with the Dharma. To the left let him paint the great goddess Bhīṣaṇā: her complexion pale white like the color of a lotus-fiber arrow, wearing white garments, adorned with all ornaments, holding a round vessel and a counting rosary, depicted in the posture of one who breathes peacefully.

"Then a pure vidyādhara should first perform the preliminary recitation. From the eighth day of the month until the fifteenth, at a place where there is a stūpa with bodily relics, one should make offerings of flowers, incense, perfume, and flower garlands, and in the four directions scatter torma offerings of rice porridge, yogurt, and rice. One should make extensive offerings of flowers, incense, and various lamps, and also present white food-offerings to the gods. Then, offering tormas of varied flavors and whatever else is available, with a mind of loving-kindness and compassion toward all sentient beings, one should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times over one hundred and eight fresh flowers, and throw each one at that image of the great goddess Bhīṣaṇā. After that, I myself shall be present there in my own form, and I shall grant whatever supreme thing one desires: lordship over a royal kingdom, the ability to travel through the sky, the discovery of treasure, the power to transmute base metals, becoming a vidyādhara oneself, the averting of untimely death, the complete pacification of all epidemic diseases, the utter vanquishing of enemy armies, the gift of having children,

the gathering of wealth, and the arising of loving-kindness toward all sentient beings — and whatever other deeds one might wish, I shall accomplish them all. O Blessed One, unless it be one who has abandoned the sacred Dharma, or who has come to doubt the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, or who has committed one of the five sins without interval, if I should fail to bring to complete fulfillment every last hope of whosoever calls upon me, then may I, O Blessed One, not awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening.

The Blessed One declared: "Excellent! Excellent, dear sister! You have entered upon this for the sake of all sentient beings, for their benefit and happiness, and excellent it is that you have likewise entered upon this so that this enumeration of the Dharma may long endure. Therefore, dear sister, always keep this vow you have made in mind."

At that very moment, this great earth shook and trembled mightily, and a rain of divine flowers fell in abundance, and all the members of that complete assembly cried out "Excellent!" saying: "Excellent! Excellent, dear sister! Well spoken is this vow of yours by which all the hopes of all sentient beings shall be fully brought to fulfillment."

Then the noble bodhisattva, the great being Avalokiteśvara, addressed the Blessed One in these words: "Blessed One, what merit will be gained by a son or daughter of good family who writes down this enumeration of the Dharma, who has it written, who reads it, venerates it, properly teaches it, recites it, and commits it to memory?"

The Blessed One replied: "Noble Avalokiteśvara, on that very point, since the question is yours, let the answer come from you yourself, as best you are able."

Avalokiteśvara then said: "Blessed One, there is nothing that the Tathāgata has not seen, not heard, not considered, and not fully known. Therefore, may the Blessed One himself please speak."

The Blessed One declared: "Son of good family, the merit that will be gained by writing down this enumeration of the Dharma, by having it written, reading it, venerating it, properly teaching it, reciting it, and committing it to memory — that merit cannot be expressed even by way of analogy. And why is that? Even if one were to satisfy the wishes of all sentient beings entirely, heaping upon them clothes and ornaments, vessels and gold, jewels and pearls, exactly as each one desired, and were to crown them with all of this — still, those sentient beings would not thereby be fully liberated from birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, mental distress, and anguish. And even if one were to crown them with the five objects of desire for the span of a hundred thousand years — still, those sentient beings would not thereby be fully liberated from the hells, from the realm of animal birth, from the world of Yama, and from the realm of hungry ghosts. But one who listens to and venerates this enumeration of the Dharma on behalf of sentient beings, who properly teaches it, who listens to its meaning and earnestly practices it — such a one becomes fully liberated from birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, mental distress, and anguish, and from all the hells, from the realm of animal birth, and from the world of Yama entirely. It is for this reason that the Tathāgata does not give any analogy to measure the merit of this."

Noble son, whoever on behalf of those who teach this enumeration of the Dharma, who hold it, recite it, write it down, and venerate it — whoever makes even the gift of a single sesame seed, a single flower, a single fruit, a banner, a strain of music, incense, a garment, or even a single ornament; whoever writes it down, causes it to be written, bears it, reads it, venerates it, teaches it rightly, reveres it, and widely and correctly expounds it to others — and whoever worships the Tathāgata dwelling in person together with his retinue for a hundred thousand years with flowers, fragrant smoke, incense, garlands of flowers, perfumed ointments, parasols, victory banners, and pennants, reveres and honors him, and serves him with every manner of comfortable provision, and has temples, walking-paths, and pleasure-groves built; and whoever has a hundred and fifty or a thousand stūpas made of the seven precious substances, each a half-league in height, built for the sake of the Tathāgata, and worships those with offerings for a hundred thousand years — one who writes down, causes to be written, bears, reads, recites, venerates, and correctly teaches this enumeration of the Dharma will accumulate merit far surpassing all of that in far greater abundance. For one who makes offerings to the Tathāgata in person is not equal to it; nor is one who bestows gifts upon all sentient beings and gratifies them with the five objects of desire equal to it.

Therefore, noble sons and noble daughters, kings, princes, great ministers, and their subordinate ministers should continuously and without interruption venerate this enumeration of the Dharma.

One should also arouse the following thought with regard to those spiritual friends who proclaim this enumeration of the Dharma, who expound it, and who accomplish its meaning in practice: one should regard them as the Tathāgata himself, and having honored and served them, one should listen to this enumeration of the Dharma, receive it, retain it, read it, take it to heart, and arouse the mind in the following way: "Those spiritual friends who regard what is purposeless as purposeful, who regard the impermanent as permanent, who perceive what is suffering as happiness, who point the way called 'the path' to those who have entered upon what is not the path, and who perform the deeds of the Tathāgata in order to fully liberate us from the hells, from the realm of animal birth, and from the world of Yama — we have found such teachers, and found them well." One should arouse just this thought.

Avalokiteśvara then spoke: "Blessed One, this enumeration of the Dharma, performing the great deeds of the Tathāgata for all sentient beings, has been taught rightly and completely."

The Blessed One declared: "Noble son, this enumeration of the Dharma will, in the future — in times to come — spread throughout the southern regions. There too, monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, kings, princes, great ministers, and ministers who are suitable vessels will emerge who venerate it, hold it, and read it, and they will come to have faith and confidence in it.

Now if it were to spread throughout the northern, eastern, and western regions as well, there too those who refuse to listen to it —

those who have no faith, no confidence, no veneration, those who are slack in diligence, forgetful, distracted by sons and daughters, servants male and female, wealth and power, laughter and flirtation, dancing, performance, and every kind of song, and who, prompted by envy and miserliness, do not listen, do not develop confidence — those sentient beings are engaged in the works of Māra. They will not be wholly freed from birth, old age, sickness, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, mental distress, and anguish, nor from the hells, the animal realm, the world of Yama, and the realms of the hungry ghosts. Therefore, sons of good family and daughters of good family who wish to be wholly freed from every lower realm should honor this enumeration of the Dharma, venerate it, teach it rightly to others, and hold it in mind.

In times of conflict and turmoil, bad dreams, ill omens, untimely death, plague among livestock, epidemic among humans, disease, fear, and every kind of harm — one should honor this enumeration of the Dharma and recite it. One should raise a victory banner, make offerings of flowers, incense, and fragrance, and offerings with the sounds of varied music; one should scatter torma offerings in the four directions, and having paid homage with flowers, incense, and fragrance, one should enact the ritual. By doing so, epidemic disease, harm, and every contagious illness will be thoroughly pacified.

Then, at that time, the Blessed One declared these verses:

What was taught by the guide of former existence,
in order to embrace all sentient beings,
that very samādhi I have now explained to you —
hold it fast, O Ānanda.

More than offering to the Three Jewels — the buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha — all three realms as a gift,
to venerate this sūtra surpasses even that giving; it cannot serve as its measure.

More than one who, with faith in a buddha, builds immeasurable temples,
whoever holds this sūtra accrues far greater merit.

Whoever scatters even a single flower, or offers cloth and garlands and ointment,
and pays homage to this samādhi — the former accumulation of merit cannot compare.

Whoever, for the sake of venerating this sūtra, gives the gift of even a kārṣāpaṇa coin,
and arouses a mind of loving-kindness for the sake of awakening — that one attains merit far greater still.

Whatever bodhisattva explains this samādhi to sentient beings with scriptural authority,
and dedicates it toward unsurpassable awakening — the merit of that one is beyond all measure or analogy.

Therefore, having heard these benefits, one should cultivate loving-kindness toward all sentient beings in just that way,
should hold this sūtra, write it out in letters, recite it, and likewise teach it.

When one is afflicted by old age, sickness, and death,
and tormented on all sides by a hundred fierce sufferings,
and is to be born among hell-beings and hungry ghosts —
in that later time, how full of remorse one will be!

At the moment of death, the mind trembles and quakes with fear,
and again and again one moans and cries out:
"Who will be my ally, my refuge?"
How such a childish mind turns this way and that in confusion!

Because one did not venerate the Tathāgata,
and robbed the buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha of their wealth —
one will be led to the unbearable world of Yama,
and henceforth there will be no refuge whatsoever, ever.

No sons or daughters, no kinsmen or close relatives;
no neighbors or companions, no laughter or flirtation.
Wealth, grain, clothing, and adornment —

all of it is cast aside — and still, suffering arises again and again, without end. Because one has not placed faith in this meditative absorption (samādhi), one will experience intolerable suffering of just that kind. When one hears of these sufferings and of those benefits, what childish mind is there that would not give rise to faith?

Therefore, monks and nuns, male lay practitioners, and kings together with their retinues should always take up this sūtra, and those who hold it should always be revered and honored.

Then the venerable Ānanda spoke these words to the Blessed One: "Blessed One, I have received this enumeration of the Dharma. Regarding it with the perception of a Teacher, I will uphold it and teach it correctly to all sentient beings."

The Blessed One declared: "Ānanda, even if you do not memorize, recite, or expound all of those teachings that I have taught and that you have received in full — by that alone you will not have committed an offense against me, nor will you have failed in respectful listening, nor will you have failed to be a hearer. But if you do not memorize this enumeration of the Dharma, do not recite it, do not venerate it, do not teach it correctly, and do not take it to heart — then by that you will have committed an offense against me, you will have failed in respectful listening, and you will not be a hearer. Therefore, Ānanda, you should receive this enumeration of the Dharma with full devotion and uphold it. In the final age, in the final time, it will perform the deeds of the Tathāgata through the unsurpassed, perfect, and complete awakening of the Tathāgata for all sentient beings."

As the Blessed One taught this enumeration of the Dharma, the minds of sixty thousand living beings were liberated from all defilements without remainder. Seven hundred bodhisattvas attained meditative absorption. Five hundred received prophecies of birth in different buddha-fields. Ninety thousand living beings were fully liberated from all afflictions and abandoned all states of misfortune, the lower realms, and all bad migrations.

Then the great bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara, again addressed the Blessed One in these words: "Blessed One, in the final age, in the final time, those sons and daughters of good family who listen to this enumeration of the Dharma, hold it, depict it in images, venerate it, and write it down in letters — they will perform the deeds of the Tathāgata, and they too will receive prophecies of birth in whatever different buddha-fields they desire.

"In the final age, in the final time, those sentient beings who are distracted in various ways by laughter and frivolity, flirtation, dance, leaping, song, and the sounds of music — those greatly obscured by the darkness of attachment, aversion, and delusion — who perceive play as something pleasant, who perceive what is impermanent as permanent, who are thoroughly seized by jealousy and miserliness, who do not venerate, do not depict in images, do not have faith, do not cherish with devotion, do not hold, do not recite, do not listen, and do not strive to accomplish this — those beings, having made this their way of weariness, and having thoroughly exhausted the fruit of their former karma, will experience various kinds of suffering and mental discomfort and will come to experience the sufferings of hell-beings. There too they will experience suffering for many hundreds of millions of eons, and then again they will be born in the hells, in animal existences, and in the realm of Yama. Through the influence of unwholesome spiritual companions, they will experience regret for a very long time.

"This being so, with body and speech —"

— and with mind well-composed, we shall maintain unshakeable faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha. Toward all sentient beings we shall cultivate a mind of loving-kindness, and a mind that has entirely abandoned jealousy, miserliness, corrupt conduct, and anger."

Then the members of that assembled retinue, having come just as they were, each performed acts of worship before the Tathāgata through their own meritorious deeds, offering divine flowers, incense powder, incense, garlands of flowers, perfumed unguents, garments, ornaments, and the sound of cries of "Ālāla!" and the noise of snapping fingers, together with divine cymbals, clapping, and singing. They then spoke the word "Excellent!" saying: "Blessed One, excellent, excellent! For the sake of all sentient beings and in order that the teaching of the Tathāgata may long endure, you have most excellently proclaimed this great Dharma discourse."

Then the venerable Ānanda addressed the Blessed One with these words: "Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma discourse, and how should we bear it in mind?"

The Blessed One declared: "Ānanda, therefore hold this Dharma discourse in mind also by the name 'Endorsed by All Tathāgatas and Treading the Grounds of the Bodhisattva,' and hold it in mind also by the name 'The Great Assembly of Miraculous Magical Displays,' and hold it in mind also by the name 'The Blessing of All Tathāgatas Gazing upon Sentient Beings and Revealing in Full the Array of Buddha-Fields.'"

Having spoken thus, the Blessed One addressed them, and all those great bodhisattvas (bodhisattvas) — noble Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, Vajrapāṇi, and the rest — and all those great śrāvakas, and Śakra (Indra, lord of the gods), Brahmā, and all the world-protectors, and the Four Great Kings, and the great yakṣiṇī Apramā, Nirmalaprabhā, Prabhāvatī, Bhayamkarī, Śrīmatī, Śaṅkhinī, Apaharī, and the rest, along with gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and great serpents — the entire retinue that had assembled in full — and the assembly of monks, nuns, male lay practitioners, and female lay practitioners all rejoiced and gave fervent praise to what the Blessed One had spoken.

This concludes the Great Vehicle sūtra entitled "The Blessing of All Tathāgatas Gazing upon Sentient Beings and Revealing in Full the Array of Buddha-Fields."

Translated and established by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi together with the great editor-translator, the monk Yeshé Dé. Revised and established by the monk Lūi Gyaltsen.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The name Gṛdhrakūṭa, "Vulture Peak," is rendered here as Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa; the Tibetan has རི་གྲུ་འཛིན, a standard equivalent. The passage locates the teaching not at the main summit but at a specific site described as the "abode" of Avalokiteśvara thereon.

The list of bodhisattvas and yakṣinī names in this passage are rendered into their Sanskrit equivalents by back-translation from Tibetan, as is standard for such assembly lists: Vimalapuṣpa, Ratnaśrī, Vidyutprabha, Vimalāloka, Amṛtaprabha, Prabhāvatī, Bhayaṃkarī, Śrīmatī, Harā, and Śaṅkhinī are working reconstructions; their precise Sanskrit originals cannot be confirmed without the Sanskrit source.

The worldly protectors Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Ratnasādhu, and Pūrṇabhadra correspond to standard figures among the four great kings and associated yakṣa-lords; the Tibetan names are matched to standard Sanskrit equivalents.  The term rendered "flesh-eating spirits" translates "śa za," a class of beings sometimes identified with a type of rakṣasa or piśāca; the list here runs nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, and śa za, all treated as distinct categories. The phrase "proximate afflictions" renders "nye ba'i nyon mongs pa," which in Abhidharma usage refers to the secondary or derivative afflictions that arise in close dependence on the root afflictions; the translation preserves this technical nuance. The passage's final sentence is a transition leading into Avalokiteśvara's contemplation and is left open-ended as in the Tibetan.  The term rendered "world of the Lord of Death" translates གཤིན་རྗེའི་འཇིག་རྟེན, referring to the realm of Yama, king of the dead — equivalent to the preta realm in some enumerations, though here it appears as a third alongside hells and the animal realm, suggesting it designates the hungry-ghost or preta world specifically.

The phrase ལྷའི་མཁྱེན་པ ("divine knowledge") is an epithet for the Tathāgata's omniscient or transcendent knowing; it is rendered plainly as "divine knowledge of the Tathāgata" to preserve the honorific sense without over-interpretation.

The number སུམ་ཁྲིས at the end is genuinely uncertain: it most naturally reads as "thirty" or "thirty-one" (sum-khri could also be read as a very large number, thirty thousand); contextually "thirty" or "thirty-one occasions" is the most plausible rendering in this narrative register, but a variant reading cannot be excluded.  The phrase rendered "five acts of immediate consequence" refers to the five ānantarya-karmas, the gravest misdeeds that bring results without any intervening rebirth. The Tibetan lists these as the foremost example of obscurations that are entirely purified by the merit of this practice.

The closing sentence is spoken in the first person by the Tathāgata, consistent with the preceding context in which the Buddha declares prophetic authority through divine knowledge.  The phrase rendered "born with ambiguous sex characteristics" translates a term meaning "born as a being with two marks," a classical reference to intersex or dual-gendered birth, treated in the text as an undesirable karmic rebirth. The translation reflects this accurately without anachronistic framing.

The phrase "foundation dhāraṇī secret mantras" renders a compound that could also be read as "dhāraṇī-mantra bases" or "root mantras of dhāraṇī." The text appears to distinguish a specific category of dhāraṇī formulas associated with the stages leading to a prophetic bestowal; the rendering chosen preserves that structural sense.  The mantra text is rendered in transliterated Sanskrit as it appears in the Tibetan phonetic transcription; the underlying Sanskrit is partially reconstructable but has some irregularities typical of dhāraṇī literature, which are preserved as-is rather than emended. The phrase "thirty Tathāgatas" renders Tibetan sum-khri, which literally means thirty thousand; however, in context the commentarial tradition sometimes reads this differently, and the literal thirty thousand is also defensible. The passage ends mid-sentence as the source text does, clearly continuing beyond the portion provided.  The mantra syllables are transliterated from Tibetan phonetic representation of Sanskrit; the Sanskrit reconstruction given follows standard scholarly convention for this dhāraṇī genre. Minor phonetic variations from classical Sanskrit are intrinsic to the Tibetan transliteration system and are not flagged individually.

The phrase rendered "breathe out the vidyāmantra properly" translates a Tibetan expression that may describe ritual breath-animation of the image; it could also refer to the practitioner properly intoning the mantra while the image is held. The precise ritual meaning is uncertain.  The phrase rendered "portrays in images" translates a term literally meaning "makes a painting or drawing of," referring to the practice of creating visual representations of a text or its associated figures — a standard act of Dharma honor alongside copying and recitation.

The sequence "subtly moving and overtly moving" renders a Tibetan distinction between two degrees of mental agitation or fluctuation in the minds and mental events of sentient beings. The precise technical referent is not entirely fixed in the commentarial tradition; it likely distinguishes fine underlying mental movement from gross or manifest movement.  The phrase rendered "foremost among two-footed beings" translates a standard epithet of the Buddha meaning "best of bipeds" (Skt. dvipādavarendra or similar); the verse is mid-sentence at the end of the passage and continues beyond what is given here.  The phrase rendered "food-thief and wretch" translates a list of abusive terms applied to lowly rebirths; the precise sociolinguistic register of these insults is difficult to recover exactly, but the sense of degradation and social contempt is clear.

The ailment "bro nad" is a classical Tibetan medical category corresponding to bilious disorders; "afflictions of the bile" is the standard rendering.  The dhāraṇī passage is presented here in reconstructed Sanskrit phonology based on the Tibetan transliteration; certain syllables are corrupt or metrically unusual in the Tibetan and the Sanskrit reconstruction is approximate rather than definitive. The phrase rendered "noble eightfold discipline" translates the Tibetan for what is standardly the eight-branch precepts of a lay person observing a one-day vow, not the Noble Eightfold Path — the Tibetan "yan lag brgyad pa" here refers to the aṣṭāṅga-upavāsa fast-day vow. The phrase "mame kaścid vihethāṃ karotu" is a negative petition meaning "let no one do me harm," which has been rendered accordingly.  The three sets of one hundred and eight flowers pressed onto the Avalokiteśvara image is an unusual detail suggesting a culminating empowerment or invocation rite. The image's subsequent movement, sound, light emission, and earth-trembling are standard signs of successful sādhana accomplishment in this genre of text.  The phrase rendered as "cannot readily be" is a translation of the Tibetan construction with "rṅo mi thogs," which idiomatically means something cannot be easily undertaken or accessed — literally "does not get traction" or "meets with no grip." The rendering "cannot readily be" captures the sense of inaccessibility or resistance without the traction metaphor, which would sound awkward aloud.

The five acts of immediate consequence (མཚམས་མ་མཆིས་པ་ལྔ, the five ānantarya) are the five gravest karmic acts: killing one's father, mother, or an arhat, wounding a buddha, and causing schism in the Saṅgha. The text's claim that even perpetrators of these acts can attain all their hopes through threefold practice of this teaching is a notable assertion of the dhāraṇī's salvific power.

The mantra passage is rendered in reconstructed Sanskrit as it appears in transliterated form in the Tibetan. Some syllables are phonetic approximations and the Sanskrit is not fully grammatical in every phrase; this is characteristic of dhāraṇī literature and no emendation has been made.  The phrase rendered "umbrella of the eighth day" translates a somewhat unusual construction in the ritual calendar context; "umbrella" here likely refers to the lunar day as a temporal canopy or marker — this is conventional in certain ritual manuals where the lunar day is framed as a protective or auspicious temporal span. The ritual instruction is that of the great female yakṣa Apratimā speaking in the first person, promising direct appearance and fulfillment of wishes to the practitioner.

The phrase "rād pa dkar po" rendered as "Rādha in white" may refer to a specific iconographic convention meaning simply "white-robed" or it may be a proper name or epithet; either reading is consistent with the text.  The mantra passage is rendered in transliterated Sanskrit as it appears in the Tibetan text; individual syllables follow the Tibetan orthographic representation of Sanskrit and are not normalized beyond standard romanization. The phrase "white grain" for པོག་དཀར་པོ refers to an offering substance, likely white mustard seed or white rice; the precise referent varies by context and tradition. "Apratimā" is the Sanskrit rendering of དཔེ་མེད་མ, meaning "the Incomparable One" or "she who has no equal."  The mantra is rendered in phonetic transcription as it appears in the Tibetan; no attempt is made to normalize it to a standard Sanskrit form, as the Tibetan transliteration is itself the ritual form intended. The phrase rendered "lotus-fiber arrow" reflects the compound mdA bu mda' rgyud kyi mdog, meaning a color like the pale fiber of a lotus stalk — an unusual simile for a very pale, almost white hue. The "noble eightfold precepts" refers to the eight-precept observance vow (Skt. aṣṭāṅgaśīla), here applied as a ritual purity requirement for the painter.  The phrase rendered "five sins without interval" refers to the five ānantarya-karmas, the gravest acts in Buddhist ethics: killing one's father, killing one's mother, killing an arhat, wounding a buddha, and causing schism in the Saṅgha. These are called sins "without interval" because they lead directly to rebirth in the lowest hell without any intervening state. The term "world of Yama" translates the Tibetan for the realm of the lord of the dead and corresponds here to a lower realm of existence rather than a neutral or higher destination.  The phrase rendered "a hundred and fifty leagues" reflects a Tibetan reading of half a league multiplied by a hundred or a thousand, which describes stūpas of considerable but varying heights. The Tibetan "ཕྱེད་པ་བརྒྱའམ་སྟོང" literally means "a half of a hundred or a thousand" parasangs, most likely describing stūpas half a league or fifty leagues in height, with the "hundred or thousand" referring to the number of stūpas built. The translation renders this as a straightforward description of the number of stūpas built to avoid awkward ambiguity in narration.  The verse translates kārṣāpaṇa as "kārṣāpaṇa coin," a small unit of currency in ancient India; the Tibetan is a phonetic rendering of the Sanskrit, and it is kept transparent here as it is a proper measure-name rather than a common noun.

The final verse is incomplete in the source text as supplied; the translation preserves the incompleteness faithfully.  The phrase rendered "receive this enumeration of the Dharma with full devotion" translates "ཕུ་དུད་བྱས་ཏེ" literally "having bowed down" or "having made prostration," indicating reverent reception. The rendering captures the devotional force without the physical gesture becoming awkward in prose flow.  The names of the yakṣiṇīs — Apramā, Nirmalaprabhā, Prabhāvatī, Bhayaṃkarī, Śrīmatī, Śaṅkhinī, and Apaharī — are reconstructed from their Tibetan epithets (Incomparable, Stainless Light, Luminous, Terrifying, Glorious, Conch-bearer, Ravisher). No Sanskrit witnesses have been consulted to verify these reconstructions, and the names are therefore rendered in plausible but provisional Sanskrit form.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
