The Secret Tantra of the General Rites of All Maṇḍalas (Sarvamaṇḍalasāmānyavidhānaguhyatantra)

The Secret Tantra of the General Rites of All Maṇḍalas (Sanskrit: Sarvamaṇḍalasāmānyavidhānaguhyatantra; Tibetan: Dkyil 'khor thams cad kyi spyi'i cho ga gsang ba'i rgyud) is a tantra that sets out, in brief yet comprehensive form, the common procedures for constructing and using maṇḍalas. It concerns the drawing of maṇḍalas, including those of the Tathāgatas such as Unconquerable One, along with consecration and related ritual practices, and it describes the qualifications expected of the master who performs these rites. The text presents itself as a general guide applicable to a very large range of maṇḍalas, extending to the three thousand beginning with that of the Subduer and the five hundred taught elsewhere. It is Toh 806 in the Kangyur, where it belongs to the Tantra section, and is classed among the tantras that deal with ritual procedure.

In the language of India: Sarva-maṇḍala-sāmānya-vidhāna-guhya-tantra. In the language of Tibet: The Secret Tantra of the General Rites of All Maṇḍalas.

Homage to the Omniscient One.

Then, furthermore, in this secret tantra, I shall explain in brief, and well, the extensive general rites of all maṇḍalas: the maṇḍalas of the Tathāgatas, such as that of the Unconquerable One; the consecration and the rest; the explanation of the root of the Lotus family; and, out of love for the beings of the world, the three thousand maṇḍalas, beginning with that of the Subduer, and all that have been taught as five hundred. This general rite of all those maṇḍalas I have explained. Therefore, by this rite, all maṇḍalas are to be drawn.

The master should be learned in all the treatises, endowed with moral discipline, and of a compassionate nature. He should be upright, patient, and pure, possessed of faith and mindfulness, and of courageous heart. He should be skilled in speech, fearless, and steadfast, skilled in the arts and clear in mind, endowed with beauty. Likewise he should be respectful, tamed, and free of anger, always delighting in the sacred Dharma, devoted to the Great Vehicle. He should be trained in the practice of secret mantra and know the distinctions among the maṇḍalas. He should know the character of disciples, and likewise hold the tantras of secret mantra. He should grant permission and bestow empowerment, and be devoted to knowing the rites and to recitation. He should have served and honored masters of his lineage, and have fully grasped all the maṇḍalas. He should honor all secret mantras and the guru, and likewise welcome unexpected guests. In binding the mudrās and the like, in the tasks of drawing the maṇḍala, and in the offerings of the practice of secret mantra, the master should be skilled.

Then I shall explain further the characteristics of the directions of the land: the ground, which kinds are excellent, and which unsuitable, proclaimed to the practitioner. Ground that is uneven, thorny, covered with potsherds, or with pits, anthills, bones, and tree stumps, with termite mounds, ashes, or salt crust, with gravel, stones, dust, hair, and many worms, ants, and insects: such ground the wise should avoid for all rites. Ground that is level, clean, and moist, free of stakes and flaws, sloping toward the east and north, is auspicious for all rites.

First dig down to about knee depth, and fill the pit with the very same earth. If there is a surplus, it is said that accomplishment will come. If the contrary occurs, the practitioner should not begin the work. If he begins, he will experience suffering and will not obtain good results.

Where water flows near the site of the maṇḍala, that is auspicious, and accomplishment is attained. A scarcity of water is condemned by the wise. A site surrounded by a variety of enclosing growth, with flowers, fruit, and leaves, and with milk-bearing trees, is highly auspicious for maṇḍalas. Ground enclosed all around and with trees possesses every excellence, and where there is water nearby as well, that ground is auspicious for maṇḍalas.

For pacifying rites, the ground should be judged white; for increasing rites, make it red or yellow; for wrathful and fierce activity, black is auspicious. Near a water's edge, a lotus pond, or the ocean, on an island in the water, in a delightful place, the pacifying maṇḍala is to be drawn.

In the haunts of the Mothers, charnel grounds, secluded places, and empty houses, in whatever places are not pleasing to the mind, there draw the maṇḍala for subjugating activity. On mountain peaks, in cow pens, at stūpas, statues, and temples, and in places of that kind, draw the maṇḍala for increase.

In delightful great stūpas, in great solitary places, on the summits of vast mountains, the maṇḍala of accomplishment is to be drawn. On mountain peaks, on mountains, in mountain valleys and caves, desiring the asuras, draw the underground vajra maṇḍala.

In the lotus's mouth, in a grove of millions of blossoms, where the pale swans cry out, one who desires kingship or wealth should draw all the glorious maṇḍalas.

In the haunts of the Mothers, on mountain peaks, and in the abodes of the gods, one should draw the vajra hook maṇḍala, which brings down spirits and destroys them.

At the great crossroads, at stūpas, and before an image of Vajrapāṇi, the practitioner should draw the maṇḍala of the Wrathful King, destroyer of obstructors.

The maṇḍalas of the Tathāgatas may also be drawn in other excellent places, and the wise should draw them all with special care. The maṇḍalas of consecration and the rest, all of them, the wise should draw with special care beside a lotus lake, in accordance with the rite. On a mountain summit, the wise one should draw, in accordance with the rite that comes from the sūtra, all the maṇḍalas such as the Subduing one, with special care. This determination of places has been taught as a special instruction.

For all of them, after the preliminary preparations, the ground is to be examined in three ways. If the special qualities are not complete, one should draw the maṇḍala by means of the general rite. It is hard to find a place where all excellent features come together. In brief, the ground should be level, glossy and bright, and sloping toward the east. A place with abundant water, adorned with fine trees, pleasing to one's eyes and mind, harmless and free of stakes and buried hazards, is auspicious for a maṇḍala, and brings about all human accomplishments.

At the dwellings of sages, at cow-pens and temples, in caves, on mountain summits, on any ground that is firmly packed, on roofs, on flat stones, beside stūpas, on islands in rushing rivers, on the shores of lakes: there the ground need not be cleansed and examined with great effort. There one need not remove stakes. One need not break up hard-packed earth there. Flaws such as being too high or too low need not arouse suspicion there. On ground that is naturally so, after sweeping and clearing it well, one smooths it with the hand and recites the secret mantra. That is its purification.

If one cannot remove all the faults of stakes, then by the secret mantra alone the cleansing will be well accomplished. For stabilizing activities, for cutting down spirits and the like, and for fierce and violent practices, the ground need not be examined at all.

For the rite of the maṇḍala ground, if one performs a fumigation and scattering offering using the fierce Kīlikīla, with the five products of the cow recited over, the ground is purified. For those such as the Invincible One, purification is by the Victor's crown protuberance itself. For all the Lotus-Holder's maṇḍalas, the ground is to be purified by the one called the Guide of Peace, the glorious lady, in accordance with the rite. The maṇḍalas of Vajrapāṇi are especially purified by the wrathful one. All activities that are to be done should also be done by this one, in accordance with the rite.

The Victor's Crown, the Guide of Peace, and the one called Wrathful One of Great Power: these three, as the three families, are to be applied to all activities. For purifying the ground, protecting it, preparing the disciples, establishing them, dispelling obstructors, purifying with fragrance, and praising with flowers, in all such activities one should purify after the preliminary preparations.

For each respective tantra, the activities and secret mantras are proclaimed. From the full moon of the middle autumn month until the last day of the final spring month, within this period the wise should draw the maṇḍala in accordance with the rite. The maṇḍala of obstructors, the inner cutting, and likewise the maṇḍalas of accomplishment need no such examination, and even in summer the wise should draw them according to the season.

For the sake of bestowing empowerment on disciples...

Whatever maṇḍalas have been proclaimed in full, whichever is the maṇḍala of permission, whichever is the maṇḍala of the samaya, whichever is accomplished for the sake of prosperity, and whichever is a great maṇḍala, all of these the wise should draw within the seven months. The qualities of the place, the time, the disciple, and the one who is to be drawn should be known. In summer too, the wise should draw the maṇḍala work according to the rite.

Fragrance, flowers, incense, offering cakes, the burnt offering, and the other rites: even if one is in want, one should not draw the maṇḍala without them. If one draws it so, one will surely die.

Inauspicious lunar days, the wrong time, the wrong place, and without the complete rite, the wise should not draw a maṇḍala. If one draws it, one will die without any doubt.

As the wise have taught, in the bright fortnight, on the full moon, or the thirteenth, or the eighth, or the fourteenth, or the tenth and the eleventh, or on the first of the waxing moon, or the fifth, or the seventh, or even on the third lunar day, on these ten days one should prepare well and draw the maṇḍala. At the junctures of the dark fortnight too, there is no objection to drawing a maṇḍala. On the fifth or the seventh, and especially on the full moon, it is auspicious to perform the rites of the Lotus-Holder's maṇḍala.

The subterranean maṇḍalas, the rites of wrathful violence, and whichever are the maṇḍalas of the wrathful ones, these may be drawn in the dark fortnight as well. On the full moon in particular it is auspicious to draw the maṇḍala of the Victor.

In the middle and last months of spring, on the ground, the wise should draw the great maṇḍala. When one has the requisite materials, when faith is strong, and when one is diligent in the work, at that time too one may draw the maṇḍala. When livelihood is abundant, and flowers and the like are plentiful, when one knows the time of such fullness, at that time too one may draw the maṇḍala.

When the teachers are pleased by the disciple's service and respect, then, since the disciple is at hand, one draws the maṇḍala for the sake of bestowing empowerment. When the sun or moon is in eclipse, when a great wonder or omen has appeared, in the month of miracles, one should prepare and draw the maṇḍala.

In the morning one performs the rites of increase; at midday one practices wrathful violence; at dusk the intelligent one draws the maṇḍala for pacification, in accordance with the rite. All the maṇḍalas are begun at the setting of the sun, before the sun has risen again, and it is proper to make offerings and request the deities to depart.

The special rites are taught by the time of each deity and each activity, according to its time. Otherwise, because the rite would be impaired, accomplishments will not arise. The intelligent should never draw a general maṇḍala by day. If one draws it by day, one will experience suffering in those very rites.

From the beginning of dusk until midnight is the time for practicing wrathful violence. Since night then passes beyond its proper time, many faults will arise. Because the night is deeply tranquil, it is generally to be desired for the samaya rites and the like. Therefore one begins at night. When the sun sets, the deities surely gather through blessing, and others too come especially to bestow blessing. The deities and secret mantras invoked by the rite, when the sun has set, wishing to benefit, will certainly confer their blessing in the maṇḍala.

With a truly peaceful mind, at a tranquil time and on a tranquil lunar day, one who invokes by mantra will obtain the accomplishment one intends. Thursday, Monday, Friday, and Sunday are good. On others, rites of great wrath should be undertaken throughout. Jupiter, the Moon, Venus, the Sun and Mars, Saturn, and the lunar mansions, the three beginning with Śravaṇa, and Ṛkṣa...

Auspicious for the maṇḍalas are such peaceful times and the favorable lunar mansions; at these the wise one should draw the maṇḍala. For wrathful rites, one draws the wrathful. The ones to be honored are Abhiṣeka, Vijaya, and Jayakṛt, Prabhā and Raktā, Dhanavatī, Bhadrā, Varuṇā and Brahmā, and Dveṣa, Maṅgala, Viṣṇu, the Lord of Beings, and Maitreya of the last lunar mansion, along with the fine-worded Pāva and Sanghā.

Of all the moments and of all the tantras, auspiciousness is found in the prescribed rites of action. Therefore one should always draw for those who are good and for good performers. A rite begun at an inauspicious time will not succeed in any way whatsoever. Therefore one should examine the moment, the lunar day, the mansion of the one who performs the rite, and the dreams, and if they are good. Begin the work when things are good; do not begin when they are not good. Even rites that are not auspicious in themselves should be begun at an auspicious time. For omens, good and bad, reveal success and failure. Therefore, before beginning, one should examine the signs with great care.

Next, the other, broader preparations are explained, namely the purification of the site. Within seven days, one should guard the site in the proper way, and through diligent effort turn back the ground, and then remove the stakes. Ground that still has stakes in it will not allow the rites performed upon it to succeed. Faulty stakes, bones, potsherds, ashes, stumps, and thorns should all be thoroughly cleared away.

Then one should wash the earth with water, make it fine, and sift it. Then one should repeatedly sprinkle it with cow's urine, level it flat like the palm of the hand, cleanse it with water mixed with cow dung, and begin from the eastern side. The wise one should smear it well. Then in the middle of it, dig a small hole, and place into it grains and all manner of jewels, consecrated with mantra.

Having purified the ground in this way, and having made it complete with the substances, the wise one should take possession of the ground in whatever way is fitting. After three days of proper binding, one takes possession of it with the secret mantra that accomplishes all rites and with the mantra of whichever maṇḍala is intended. With one hand, one actually performs the purifying and scattering with scented water; with the other hand, one strokes the ground and praises it. When the master has taken possession in this way, the place has been taken possession of.

Then, with the secret mantra that accomplishes all rites, one takes possession of the disciples. Taking the thread spun by a young girl, one recites over it forty-nine times. The disciples, having reflected with their minds, settle in equipoise and cast away the knot. Then, when the disciples have been taken possession of, no obstacles will arise to the rite.

On the morning of drawing the maṇḍala, as on the previous evening, one stays in preparation. At first, when the sun has risen, one examines the directions of the site for flaws. Then, the one who will lay out the maṇḍala should examine everything well in the mind.

Food that comes from the mantra tantras should be good, pure, and rich in oil, agreeable and pleasing, and the master together with the disciples should eat it in moderation. Then in the evening one bathes and puts on clean white garments. The master, together with the disciples, should go to the side of the maṇḍala.

The ground for drawing the maṇḍala should be well swept and well smeared. It is purified and scattered with scented water over which the Great Wrathful One has been recited. Those who stand in the middle in preparation recite the essence mantras of the families. It is taught that all rites are performed through the secret mantra of the maṇḍala.

Upon the ground, with scented ointment, one makes the maṇḍala twelve finger-widths in size. With the vidyā mantra of the maṇḍala, one strokes it with the hand and recites seven times. Then, holding the principal deities in mind by name, one makes offerings as fitting with scented ointment, flowers, and the like, together with the essence mantra. One should also present food offerings to the deities, and present incense that has been consecrated and praised.

Then one should praise it before the water prepared with sandalwood, scatter flowers upon it, and offer incense in accordance with the rite.

Take a twig of the udumbara fig or of the aśvattha tree, one without blemish, neither too thick nor too thin, and make it twelve finger-widths long. Wash it well with scented water, wrap it round with threads, anoint it with perfumed ointment, and fumigate it with incense. Stroking it with the hand, recite the essence mantra of the family many times, or else seven times.

According to the number of disciples, gather twigs of this kind. Join the twigs together, head to foot, with a single tuft placed at the top, and bind them from the tip. Then the wise one, having firmly protected the place, himself, and the disciples, should make excellent offerings to all the deities, first in order to pacify obstructors.

Make a fire offering of sticks smeared with butter, of sesame mixed with butter, and a libation of butter. Make a fire offering of rice mixed with curd. After this, the essence mantra is recited. Then the pacifying fire offering is performed with the very vidyā mantra of pacification.

Then, having examined the disciples well, one should perform the preliminaries properly. The disciple should be of good lineage, pure, with great courage, and eager for the Dharma. He should have great faith and be endowed with patience, be mindful and learned, upright, gentle, and given to inviting others to share what he has. He should be steady, disciplined, and pleasant in speech, skilled in speaking and capable of recounting what he has learned, with right understanding, and grateful for what has been done for him. He should be intelligent and bold, aspire to greatness without pride, be of fine complexion, form, and age, and be well practiced in the treatises. He should be neither too tall nor too short. A disciple whose mind possesses these and similar qualities is auspicious.

Those of cruel and perverse nature, without compassion, who live by wrongdoing, whose limbs are deficient or excessive, who are too heavy, too gaunt, or too short, with red eyes and a face prone to anger, whose complexion is mottled and whose limbs lack the proper marks, such disciples, full of faults, the teacher should reject. Likewise reject disciples of poor physique and no virtue, of low birth, who live by wrongdoing, who are diseased, or who have no faith.

Those wicked people who are inflamed with desire for prostitutes, who are devoted to drink and craving for ornaments, these one should always reject. Disciples whose minds have faith in the Three Jewels, who are restrained by the vows of moral discipline, and who especially delight in the Great Vehicle, it is auspicious to accept.

Disciples whose limbs are whole, who are especially endowed with good qualities, free of illness and of noble lineage, are rare, as are those of faith, firm in their observances. Beings who have faith in the Three Jewels, who delight in the way of the Great Vehicle, and who desire merit, these great ones, in brief, one should accept.

A disciple earnest in seeking to accomplish the secret mantra of the Sugata, though of poor appearance and lacking good qualities, may be admitted if he is intelligent. The maṇḍala rite with its four assemblies, the one who delights in the Great Vehicle, and the one devoted to his own training are all taught to be proper participants in the rite.

Some practice secret mantra for the sake of accomplishment; others, wanting something else, seek merit; still others enter the maṇḍala for the sake of the next world, or for this one. For the sake of the next world, the wise should enter the maṇḍala after generating great faith; they should not desire the fruits of this life. For the sake of the next world, a person who desires the abundant results of this life, in desiring this life in that way, will not flourish in the next world.

The wise one should take one disciple, or three, or five, or else seven.

Twenty, or up to five, but never an even pair: one should accept disciples in this way. Beyond that number, one does not know how to receive disciples properly. In brief, one should not accept disciples who are inwardly at odds with one another. Let each take the others to heart, and let them benefit the teacher, being peaceful and disciplined. In short, one should accept disciples who come from the noble land and who are born of good family.

For the burnt offering, these disciples should eat only a single meal. On the evening of that day, as far as they are able, let them take the vows in the same way. Disciples such as these, clean and dressed in white, should be seated facing east, and the preparatory rite should be begun.

First, have them go for refuge to the three. Then the teacher should generate the awakening mind in those in whom it has not yet arisen, and for those in whom it has arisen, bring it to remembrance. Next, with the recitation of the wrathful mantra, scatter scented water upon the head. Touching the head and settling in equipoise, recite seven times. With a hand anointed with perfumed ointment, placed upon the head, the wise one should likewise recite seven times the essence of the Knowledge King.

For the family of the Victor, the king of knowledge-mantras is the one-syllable Cakravartin. For the family of the lotus, the king of knowledge-mantras is the ten-syllable Hayagrīva. For the family of the vajra, the king of knowledge-mantras is likewise the Great Power, Beautiful Destroyer of Harm, endowed with four syllables Hūṃ, utterly fierce in all rites. The wrathful Amṛta rite, which is common to all three families as well, was spoken by the Lord of Secrets, Pāyā, in order to crush all obstructors.

Then, with the mantra that accomplishes all rites, sprinkle the crown of the head and recite. With that same mantra, perform the purifying fumigation and scattering, and fumigate well with incense. The empowerment vase, filled with grains and all the other things, should have a little water poured in; the Knowledge King is invoked over it, and having offered the scented water as an offering, one should prepare according to the rite. Flowers are put in as well, and it is fumigated with incense. Afterward, at three times in the day, the wise one should recite well. Reciting within the maṇḍala as well, with that one confers the empowerment.

The disciples, assembled in harmony and facing north, are seated with palms joined, and tooth-sticks are given in due order. The disciples, facing east, chew the tooth-sticks in silence. Once finished chewing, they are not needed, and they are not to be thrown at one another. The tooth-stick is cast straight before them.

If at that moment it faces forward and stands upright, this is called the supreme accomplishment. Likewise, if it faces east, that is said to be a middling accomplishment. If it faces an intermediate direction or the north, worldly accomplishments will be achieved. If, among a hundred tooth-sticks cast, one should face downward, then without doubt that signifies the accomplishment of the realm beneath the earth.

Having drawn the disciples near, and with them seated as before, the teacher, so that each may drink, pours the scented water, consecrated with the secret mantras that accomplish all rites, into a vessel, and gives it seven times. Having drunk it there, they rise and rinse the mouth outside. Then, having made offerings as well, holding incense in the hand, the intelligent one should respectfully make supplication to the deities. First, one requests the presence of the mantra of whichever maṇḍala it is. In the same manner and order, one requests the presence of all the deities, saying: "This one, Blessed One, I pay homage to the Knowledge-Mantra King. Having become compassionate, out of compassion for the disciples, and in order to make offerings to you as well, tomorrow I wish to draw the maṇḍala. Blessed One, to me who am devoted, may it be fitting that you grant permission."

Buddhas, protectors of the world, loving ones, bodhisattvas and arhats, whatever other deities of the secret mantra there may be, the deities who guard the world, and whatever mighty spirits there are, all those who possess the divine eye and delight in the teaching for the sake of beings: I beseech you, turn your attention to me.

I, named so-and-so, will, as best I am able and in accordance with the rite, inquire tomorrow into the auspicious maṇḍala called such-and-such. Holding in your thoughts loving-kindness toward me and my disciples, I beseech you to bless the entire assembly into the maṇḍala.

Having spoken thus three times, make homage with a pure intention and also utter words of praise. Then request them once more to depart.

Having explained to the disciples the Dharma that is free of attachment and endowed with it, have them lie down on ground spread with kuśa grass, with the head toward the east. Then, when they rise at dawn, one should ask them what dreams they saw. Having heard, one should declare, without hesitation, whether the dreams are good or not good.

If in a dream one sees a buddha, it is as though one directly beheld an ocean of good qualities. If one sees a stūpa or an image, and begins making offerings to it; or listens to the Dharma from monks, or even from others; or practices the Dharma; or likewise reads a scriptural volume; if in a dream one sees the Saṅgha, or sees a single monk, and keeps company with him and converses, or oneself becomes a monk; if one sees monasteries, or likewise sees nuns; if one sees the children of the Victors, or likewise one's father and mother, one's teacher, and friends of many kinds, then it is auspicious to see them in a dream. One will gain knowledge-mantras and accomplishments.

Likewise, upholding the trainings, and many kinds of festivals, flowing rivers and the ocean, mountains and elephants: seeing these too is proclaimed to be good. Seeing kings is auspicious. Ascetics whose conduct accords with the Sugata, brahmins, wealthy people, and holy persons; cattle, horses, and geese, lions and deer: to see these in a dream is auspicious.

Auspicious birds, gold, treasures, jewels and silver, wealth of many kinds, and in short, many kinds of sources of riches; weapons, grains, fruits, and flowers, ornaments of many kinds, food and clothing, children and youths, and women of beautiful form: to see these in a dream is good. Or to obtain them, touch them, and speak with them.

In a dream, to receive consecration, to attain the wealth of becoming a king, to become a general, to be victorious in battle and slay enemies, to travel in company with relatives, to see deities, to ride a mount or a chariot, likewise to climb mountains and rooftops, and to see wonders of many kinds: in a dream, seeing these is virtuous.

To offer burnt offerings of sticks in fire, to engage in good deeds, to swim across water and cross over a gorge, to punish thieves, to defeat an opponent in a contest of strength, to wrestle and stand up victorious, to dream of various games, likewise to practice feats of skill: all auspicious things, if seen, are explained to be most virtuous. To hear the rite of the secret mantra, to see a virtuous festival, to begin a good rite of accomplishment, to see the practitioners, and the deities and others of this kind: in this way, the many kinds of virtuous signs should be examined carefully with the intellect.

What is contrary to these should be avoided. Virtuous undertakings will be accomplished; non-virtuous ones will not. Having recognized the non-virtuous, the wise should abandon them. The signs of virtue are of three kinds: superior, middling, and lesser. The three accomplishments of the secret mantra, superior, middling, and lesser, will likewise be attained.

For whatever is non-virtuous, pacify it with the pacifying fire offering and the pacifying secret mantra. With butter from a cow, make one hundred and eight offerings, and pacify according to the rite.

Then, for the disciples who are free from wrongdoing and wholly pure, out of kindness toward them, let them be accepted as one wishes. Having recalled within oneself all the secret mantras of the maṇḍala, wearing white garments and without distraction, one goes to the presence of the maṇḍala. With the mantra that accomplishes all rites, perform the purification and scattering offering at the very beginning. Take a thread of five colors and recite those same mantras over it a hundred times. Then, joined with good omens, the wise one marks out the maṇḍala.

The colors of the cord are five: white, red, likewise yellow, blue, and the fifth, black. The colored powders are the same. One should make offerings to the Three Jewels, and having paid homage to the abodes of the deities, the wise one should draw the cord. At sunrise, within oneself, examine the directions well with the mind. First, taking the east, hold the line level. The master faces north and looks toward the one holding the cord. Then, circling to the right, he himself faces west. Then, in the west, he himself lays down the line. After that, in the north, the wise one lays down the line.

First he sits in the southeast and examines the two directions. After that, in the southwest, he lays out the line from the two directions. From the northwest and northeast corners, he looks toward the one holding the cord. Having made the square even in its proportions, he lays the line along the outer boundary. Having made all the boundaries equal, in this way he fixes the measure with the cord. Having done so, in the center of it he should drive one peg. Then below that, at the four corners, he drives four pegs.

Likewise, for the second and third maṇḍalas, from the corners, the larger and smaller ones too, in due order, are said to be begun completely. Gradually they should be drawn half by half. As for any other maṇḍalas of a retinue that are described, all of those are said to be drawn simply with white powder.

When making maṇḍalas of two, three, four, or many tiers, the outermost tier should be made with a single door and be broad. The others, in the manner of the directions, should be made with four doors and with door-surrounds. Or else, to be free of all doubt, one makes four doors, one in each direction. For the essential maṇḍala, the most excellent one is made with four doors. Distinguish the western door, or whichever, as taught in the text. The remainder are to be cut off with white powder.

Although many maṇḍalas are taught through the arrangement of the three kinds of maṇḍala, whatever arrangements of the many maṇḍalas are taught, all of these are known to be divisions of those. Those who have become the chief deities should always be placed in the maṇḍala. The remaining maṇḍala deities should be placed in the second. The world guardians and others are taught to be gathered in the third. Others than these are arranged exactly as they are described.

The cord for marking the maṇḍala should be made of clean, strong, fine thread, spun to the right, and likewise spun by a young girl.

The thread should be new and perfectly clean, beautiful and altogether fitting, fragrant and pleasant to the touch, well spun and firm, neither too thick nor too thin, and free of any knots or kinks. With this thread, with flowers, incense, and offerings, the wise one should lay out the lines.

Pegs of the wood of the offering-tree, with their tips pointing downward and well praised, should be driven in at the four directions for the rite of drawing the maṇḍala. If bad omens occur, the accomplishment will not be achieved. If the cord breaks, the master will die. If it is carried off too long or too short, sickness will afflict. If the directions are mistaken, the disciple will go mad. Therefore the wise one should lay out the lines with great care and thoroughness in every respect.

As for the examination of the building site, whatever is determined regarding the ground there should be treated the same way. Then, with whatever the master can afford, the noble Saṅgha should be requested to teach the Dharma. Or else the disciples appointed by the master should be requested to teach the Dharma. If this is not possible, the monks appointed by the Saṅgha should give the teaching. Or one may make offerings to the buddhas, or present gifts to the Saṅgha as well.

The master together with the disciples should recollect the Wrathful King, and in the afternoon should bathe properly, using skyur ru ra and similar substances. Having bathed, clean and dressed in white garments, and equipped with all the requisite implements, they should establish a mind of loving-kindness and go to the maṇḍala. The master should gather all the accumulations and abandon all wrong views. For all the drawing of maṇḍalas, the master should be one who is skilled.

First, the ground of the maṇḍala should be smeared with cow dung mixed with cow urine. Then it should be purified with fragrant water and scattered with offerings. All around the edge of the ground, crushed powder should be sprinkled and prostrations made. So that the mind is inspired with devotion, loose flowers should be strewn. It should be encircled with threads, marked with banners and flowing pennants, and adorned with strung garlands, and auspicious rites should be shown.

Then, in one place to the north, all the implements should be gathered. Having been protected by the Wrathful King, they should be arranged by the intelligent one. After the site has been purified and offerings scattered, and the obstructors have been dispelled, one should first protect oneself and the maṇḍala on all sides. Combining this with auspicious omens, one should generate a mind of devotion, and begin at the evening time that arrives at the juncture of day and night.

Even if the omens are not favorable, one should not become discouraged. Having paid homage to the three families, one should begin slowly and properly. If bad omens occur again and again in succession, there will be no accomplishment, and at that time one should not begin. Or else, to pacify them, one should offer a burnt offering of one hundred and eight portions of ghee into a blazing fire of yam wood. To pacify, for the Tathāgata family one performs the pacification with Buddhalocanā; for the Lotus family, with Pāṇḍaravāsinī (the Famed One); for the Vajra family, with Māmakī. For the common practice of the three families, there is the great knowledge-mantra of Māmakī. For all activities, the intelligent one should therefore pacify with this.

The maṇḍala participants should proceed as the ritual prescribes. Then the offering water should be presented. The vessel may be of gold or silver, of copper, or of conch shell; it may be made of wood or stone, or of clean new clay. Into it white flowers should be placed, and it should be fumigated with incense. Then, having filled it with fragrant water, the intelligent one should make the offering, and while fumigating with incense, should recite mentally. Then the intelligent one, reciting the root secret mantra, should in the central region of the ground...

Planting both knees on the ground, he should present the offering water. Or else, for the sake of the offering water in every maṇḍala rite, he should present white flowers, or fine incense, or fragrant perfumed unguents. Incense and unguents that contain the limbs of living creatures are to be avoided. In every rite that is performed, the water should be kept pure and clean.

For the maṇḍalas, unguents or incenses made of a single ingredient, and flowers sprung from dry ground, fragrant and white, are auspicious. Then, when the disciples have gathered, he should purify and scatter offerings with scented water. Those who have performed the protection of the assembly should be arranged to one side. Having recited the Perfection of Wisdom, and paid homage with reverence, and having called to mind the whole assembly of noble ones, then one should draw the maṇḍala.

The wise one should draw it with the five kinds of metal, or with white powder and the like. Or a disciple who is faithful and endowed with good qualities should draw it with powder of precious substances. If the precious metals cannot be obtained, it should be done with powder of ground rice. The five colored powders, finely ground as described, powders obtained from natural sources, and various kinds of stone, should be applied to the work of the powders. In this way these four kinds of material have been proclaimed as the sources of powder: all the metals, precious substances, earths from natural sources, and ground grain. For all maṇḍala rites they should be used as powder.

Or else, in the ritual procedure of an action, red powder, burnt brick, black ash, and white ash made from barley and wheat are permitted. For actions that are swift in their effect, for subduing obstructors, and for the wrathful, forceful rites, ash is permitted in the maṇḍala work.

In the ritual of the maṇḍala, all the materials of powder described before are suitable, but in particular they are auspicious in order, beginning with the first. For the pledge rite, the finest metal; for empowerment, what comes from precious substances; for pacifying, powder of rice; for increasing, what comes from natural sources; and for wrathful, forceful conduct, ash and the like are especially auspicious. This is the sequence of the powder ritual, taught together with its distinctions.

Beginning from the northeast corner, one should draw with the vajra held between the fingers, or else with the hook mudrā, or with the gesture of the alms bowl, or else with the hand of the knowledge-holder. First the white is to be sprinkled. Beneath it the red is sprinkled. Then the yellow is sprinkled. Beneath that the green is sprinkled. The mantrin should sprinkle the black color outside of all. It should go around clockwise without a break in the flow, all equal and without any gap. If it is poor, or damaged, or uneven, or interrupted, many harms will come about. Therefore, with great diligence, the wise one should sprinkle the powder.

The one who is skilled in all the directions should mark out the gate in the center. On the two sides, four each of the lines should be set aside. The great water channel with its platforms should be left a little larger. Where the other water channels are cut off, with white powder, in the central part of the gate, a fine line should be drawn. Or one may draw the gate's mudrā, or the gate guardian as one wishes.

The first maṇḍala is drawn with the five colored powders, the second with three colors, and the third with white powder alone, in a single line. Moreover, what some have taught, that its design is a single line, and what is taught as the ash powder, all of these are one design.

Having drawn the maṇḍala in this way, one should examine it carefully in three parts, and the width of the water channels, of two parts, should be fixed with great care. These distinctions are taught in general by the three families. Or else, from the individual tantras, one should proceed in the order as it is explained.

The grounds of the deities' abodes should be smeared with cow dung. Beneath that, in particular, they should be smeared with the water of the five products of the cow. Having sprinkled everything with scented water...

Beneath that, the colored powders are to be spread, and the ground is to be sprinkled with scented water that has been praised and consecrated by the king of vidyā-mantras.

The ritual procedure of the maṇḍalas is taught as threefold in its entirety, for the arrangement of all the deities is explained in three ways. The first is taught as drawing the deities in bodily form. The second is to draw the hand-emblems. The third, the rite of drawing them as seats and abodes, is fully proclaimed.

One who has understanding should become skilled in the manner of drawing the bodily forms. Having purified oneself, draw each deity's own essential nature just as it is described. Fit the limbs proportionately to the form. Draw clearly and with distinct definition. Moreover, the forms are proclaimed to be made in accord with the measurements of the maṇḍalas. Following one's own scriptural source, draw the forms with their colors and figures just as they are given, so that no limb is deficient, and draw them in the form of a peaceful nature.

One who knows the rites of secret mantra should draw the maṇḍala by this procedure. Those who are intelligent but untrained should arrange the hand-emblems. Even for the trained, it is extremely difficult to complete all the limbs with powder. And if one makes them complete and elaborate, the ritual work is long delayed. If the forms are accomplished well, one will not be able to grasp so many deities. If a limb is flawed, blessing is not bestowed, and it is taught that the actual accomplishment will not occur. Therefore the wise should arrange the deities in the form of hand-emblems. Or else, the lords of the three families may be arranged in bodily form as one wishes.

Among these, for the Blessed Buddha, the emblem is the crown protuberance (uṣṇīṣa), according to the sequence. Reciting his mantra in mind, one should draw it with white powder. The emblem of the noble Avalokiteśvara is proclaimed to be the lotus. The emblem of Vajrapāṇi is the sharp vajra blazing with three points. For the other deities, the emblems are as the scriptures describe. Or else, the emblem of the lord of the family is shared in common by each family.

Whatever the distinguishing mark of any given deity may be, that is the emblem of that deity. This is the brief and unerring explanation.

The emblem of the Fierce One is the sharp trident. The emblem of Vighnāntaka is the raised trident. Viṣṇu has the sharp wheel. Mahāsenā has the short spear. Brahmā is said to have the lotus. Indra is said to have the vajra. The emblem of the Fire God is the fire-pit. The emblem of Yama is the staff. Nairṛti has the sword. Varuṇa is said to have the noose. The emblem of Vāyu is the banner. Kubera has the club. Īśāna is said to have the trident. These eight are the eight deities of the directions. The emblem of the Earth goddess is the vase. The emblems of the sun and moon are made as circles. Among the deities, according to their individual distinctions, the emblems such as the svastika and so forth should be drawn by the wise just as they are described. Or else all of them may be drawn as circles.

Wherever the arrangement of deities in bodily forms has been taught, there too one may arrange either hand-emblems or seats, as is explained. The emblems of these and the rest, in accord with the rites as they are taught, are said to be drawn according to the rite even where the maṇḍalas do not mention them. Thus this arrangement of hand-emblems is taught as the second manner of arrangement.

The rite of arranging the deities on seats is taught as a third, different from this. Within the maṇḍalas, one draws it with dots of colored powder. Within the measure of the maṇḍala, a wide circle is drawn all around. The deities who are lords of the families are drawn in this way in sequence. For the other deities, the general rite of the seats is taught: whether round or square, one should first place the seat, recite that deity's mantra in mind, and the wise should then arrange the deity upon it. Outside, upon the dots...

The wise one should set out the deities by name. Having established them all upon the dots, he should then begin the invitation. These are the arrangement upon seats, which is proclaimed as the third.

If one is unable to do the extensive form, one should make the maṇḍala of the arrangement on seats. Or else, one who knows the rites may take the rites of these three, one by one, or two, or all three together, and mingle them, and draw the maṇḍala well.

Having first placed the secret mantras of the three lords of the families, the wise one then draws, within the maṇḍala, the hand-emblems of all the remaining deities. Outside, the seats are drawn. This is the general rite. For maṇḍalas in particular, the middle way is highly praised.

If the forms are not well completed, the fault is as explained before: the places become empty. Therefore one does not know the last rite. Whichever of the three hand-emblem methods is set out, the middle one is proclaimed as supreme. It is especially praised, and blessing comes upon it. Drawing the hand-emblems is easy, and whatever the hand-emblem is, that very thing is the deity. Therefore the wise should take great care and draw the hand-emblems of the maṇḍalas.

In all maṇḍalas, even where it has not been taught, there is no doubt. Beneath the Buddha, the Blessed One, one draws separately the goddess whom no other can overcome. At the empty center, upon a vase, one places the Perfection of Wisdom, and there too one should make offerings and recite.

Even where it has not been taught, the wise one should always draw the white-robed goddess (Pāṇḍaravāsinī) beside the noble Lord Avalokiteśvara. Beside Vajrapāṇi one should draw, throughout, the one who prepares the nectar, and Mahāvīryā and Māmakī, drawing their great hand-emblems.

Knowing the rite, one should draw at the doors Ānanda and Upananda. As explained by the wise, one should likewise draw the Seizer-goddess in front. At all the doors one draws a vajra. The guardians of the directions, with hand-emblems in accordance with the tradition, are each drawn in wrathful form, each in the place of his own direction. Yakṣas such as Maṇibhadra, and whichever others delight in the teaching, are likewise set outside the northern door, in the outermost part.

Even where it has not been taught anywhere, in the east, one should respectfully make a maṇḍala and offer to all the buddhas, and likewise to the Dharma and the Saṅgha. Mañjuśrī in the form of a youth, the Victor's son Mahāsthāmaprāpta, Ākāśagarbha, Amoghasiddhi, Vimalamati, and other great bodhisattvas like them are set outside the maṇḍala. The companions of the Fortunate Eon, Maitreya and the others, are all set there.

Vajra groups and Suvāhu, likewise the commanders of the obstructers, the Great Lord (Śiva) with his consort, and Great Brahmā, the grandsire, are drawn. The kings among holders of awareness-mantras are also drawn: the one called Elephant, Spreader of Limbs with his trident-bearers, on the left Cūḍāmaṇi and Durdharṣa, and Nānāprabha and Susiddhi. These seven are the lords among holders of awareness-mantras, and these seven are chiefs of the family. The powerful accomplished ones are well set in the southern direction of all maṇḍalas.

The Mothers, the Nāyikās, and likewise the various planets, Rāhu, Balavat, and Rabsim, Vairocana and the others, and the nāgas such as Dhanavardhana are set in the western direction. In the east are the vajra hand-emblems, together with Indra and the gods; likewise the gods of the Pure Abodes are also to be honored with respect.

The maṇḍala of the sun and moon, distinguished by white and red, is drawn in the east and west...

Then the wise one makes offerings to these two. In the southeast, in the direction of Agni, the fire-pit is drawn, with the fire god and the seers together with their retinues. In the southern direction is Yama's staff as the hand-emblem, together with Yama, the hungry ghosts, and the others. In the southwestern direction is the sword as emblem, with Nirṛti and the rākṣasas. In the western direction of the water god is the noose as emblem, with the water god together with the nāgas. In the northwestern direction of the wind is the banner as emblem, with the wind god and the winds. In the north is the hand-emblem of the club, with Kubera and the yakṣas. In the direction of the Powerful One, in the northeast, is the trident as emblem, with the Powerful One together with his host. Below is the vase as hand-emblem, with the earth goddess and the asuras. The guardians of the directions are to be set in order, in this way.

Having placed them in their positions, the wise one should offer to each of them with their retinues, with perfumes, incense, flowers, and the like.

The Ūrṇā (the tuft of hair between the eyebrows), the Short Spear, the Wheel-Turner, and the Great Arising; the Great Awareness-Mantra, the Eye, the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel, and the Banner; the Messenger, Great Diligence, and likewise the Unconquerable One: all these of the Tathāgata family are to be placed in all the maṇḍalas.

Yaśovatī and the Great White One, likewise the White-Robed One, Hayagrīva, and Ekajaṭā, Tārā, White Tārā, Bhṛkuṭī, and the Great Glorious Lady, and the mantras that bring about what is wished: all of these the wise one should place, according to the rite, in every maṇḍala of the noble Avalokiteśvara.

The Vajra Hook, Khutsur, the Awareness-King with his hand-emblem, the Great Wrathful One, Thabjor, Gompa Dorwa, Vajra Mesha, Vajra Beconda, and the wrathful one called Chölpa: in the maṇḍala of Vajrapāṇi, these too should be placed, even though they have not been named.

Within the first maṇḍala, after setting the deities as described, the wise one should then, in the second maṇḍala, in due sequence, place also the mantras that were not mentioned and those that are desired. Without error, in the third as well, one should place them with distinction.

In the four directions, four readers of the Dharma are seated. Then, in the eastern direction, the Perfection of Wisdom is placed. What is placed in the northern direction is the sūtra Golden Light, the Supreme. What is placed in the western direction is the Tathāgata's Secret Sūtra, the Great Vehicle sūtra taught as the Stem Array. Placing the remaining one in the southern direction, one should honor all these with reverence.

In order to fully please the lord of the secret mantras of all the tantras, the wise one should also perform, outside the maṇḍala, this other, general rite. In the north, south, and east, in these three directions, one makes three platforms. Contemplating the three families, one performs the rite of invitation. One should present offering-waters filled with flowers and incense, saying: "This is offered to all the mantras of the Tathāgata families." For the buddha family, the offering is in the east; for the lotus holder, in the north; and for the mantras taught by the Lord of Secrets, in the south.

When this is done, all the mantras of the three families together with their retinues will surely be pleased with the offering made here. By this same rite, in the western direction, one declares, "This is offered to all the worldly gods," and makes the offering outside, upon a platform.

In the rite of pacification, the bodhisattvas, the Three Jewels, and the gods who dwell in the Pure Abodes are also to be placed. In the rite of increase, in particular, all the awareness-mantras and secret mantras are to be placed, and the yakṣas who delight in the teaching are also to be placed. In the maṇḍala for fierce and forceful activity...

The mudrās of the wrathful ones are the pure forms of the great fierce ones, and many male and female attendants are to be arranged. For all maṇḍalas, the activities are to be understood as threefold. Therefore, by these rites, maṇḍalas are to be assessed as of three kinds.

In the very center of the maṇḍalas, except for an empty space anywhere else, wherever it may be, there the Perfection of Wisdom is to be placed. Or else, to the right of the door, it is to be placed upon an excellent disciple. On the left side, for the sake of the fire offering, the fire is to be kindled with firewood of the burning kind. Or else the fire is to be kindled well in the intermediate direction between east and south. Or else, in accordance with the activity, the deities are to be placed following the order of the directions.

If one works in a clean house, a dwelling, a cave, or a space chosen as one likes, one may do there as one wishes. But in a space that has been chosen, the teacher is not to draw any other maṇḍala than the one that is being accomplished. If he draws one, he will die.

All maṇḍalas are auspicious in a wide and spacious place. In fine houses or in courtyards, one may draw as is convenient, by habit. Rubble, tree stumps, trees, and stones are to be thoroughly examined and removed, for these are said to be spikes. If the wise one has no means of removing them, he is to perform a pacifying rite and leave them. In the essence maṇḍala, however, such things are never to be left through carelessness.

Apart from the central part of the maṇḍala, particular items such as rubble in dwellings and the like are not faulty, for they remain in their natural state there. In fine houses and the like, they are said to be purified by sweeping and offering a sprinkling of torma. On a mountain, on level ground, the spikes of stones need not be examined.

If, because of the nature of the site, the deities must be placed to one side, the wise one is to perform a pacifying rite and then place them. In the essence maṇḍala this is never to be done. Whatever contradictions arise through the demands of the task, the wise one is to remove them all by pacifying activity.

Having drawn the maṇḍala completely by this rite, the intelligent one, settling the mind well in equipoise, is to examine it afterward as well. If one in a hundred is not well done, it is to be corrected again. The wise one may use his own secret mantra, or the mantra of the disciple, to dispel what is desired to be removed.

For a disciple who has been examined, if one wishes to confer empowerment, then for the sake of empowerment the maṇḍala is to be drawn with white powder. In accordance with the maṇḍalas, one makes a square platform, and in its center draws a lotus complete with five colored powders. Auspicious signs and the like are drawn as one wishes. What is taught for the sake of auspiciousness is either drawn or actually set out.

The wise one also marks with powder the lines for the ground where the vessels are to be placed. All the forms made as vessels are to be gathered and set out there. The ground markings for the vases, the banners, and the descent of the horse are also to be made with powder as one wishes, and the outer decoration likewise.

Then, further, the rite for inviting the deities and the offerings, in their proper order, will be explained briefly and correctly.

Having drawn the maṇḍala according to the rite, one is to make the close touching and purify it. Having also paid homage to the deities, one is to examine whether the omens are good or bad. Facing the outer eastern direction, mentally reciting the essence mantra or secret mantra of the maṇḍala's deities, one is to examine the signs. Until some good omens appear, one is to visualize just that, and remain striving in recitation with a single mind. Seeing this, the intelligent one is gladdened. Whether by the secret mantra that accomplishes all activities, or by whatever I myself have recited...

The protection is to be applied well. Or else, as the common practice of all the tantras, to turn back all obstructing spirits, the vajra dagger is most powerful in effort. The wrathful one, the nectar, the fire-offering rite, and the vajra spoken over the head, together with the dagger, the fence, and the net, make up the five. The wise one, being intelligent, is to apply these according to the rite. The protection is to be done with the root secret mantra, or else with its essence mantra. For the disciples, the protection is to be done mentally, just as before. When the protection has been done, after that the skilled master is to bring the disciples into the maṇḍala. Once they have entered, he is to take the vessel of offering water, and the offering waters are to be presented.

The vessel for the offering water may be of gold or silver, of copper or crystal, or of a jewel. It may be made of white clay, or of wood, or likewise of stone. It may be a conch, or a leaf cup, or a bowl of new cloth or hide, or a cup made of earthenware. Whatever is new and whole in all its parts is to be purified and taken up. Into it, flowers over which the wrathful mantra has been recited are also to be placed. Settling in meditative equipoise, and reciting the secret mantra of the maṇḍala seven times, one is to reverently present the offering water, scented with perfumed water, just as before. Having offered it to the central maṇḍala, the remainder is to be scattered to the others. Having cleansed all the maṇḍalas with incense and scattered offerings, one is then to perform this rite.

Take a black vase, without cracks, of fine form, of deep red color, new, unbroken, unchipped, well shaped and round. Recite the mantra over it seven times. It is to be filled with scented water, and provided with all the grains, with medicinal herbs, and fully endowed with all the precious substances. Around its neck it is to be wrapped with a fresh cloth, and adorned with garlands of flowers. Its mouth is to be decorated with beautiful sprays of leaves. Auspicious fruit is placed in its mouth, with fruit, flowers, and small gifts. It is anointed with perfume and fumigated with incense. All of this is to be endowed with auspiciousness. Those over which the mantra has been recited seven times are sought for the sake of auspiciousness. They are to be set in the directions and the intermediate directions.

If one cannot gather all of these vases endowed with every quality, then for the sake of the empowerment, one vase of middling quality should be made with earnest effort and set well in place. Having placed vases at every corner and every door, two each are to be set at the great intermediate doors, placed in a special manner. One vase is to be placed prominently near the outer door. If many cannot be gathered, eight or else four are to be set. For small gatherings, they are to be set in the farther places, in a special manner, and one placed near the door; this must be done with certainty.

The five grains are rice, wheat, beans, barley, and sesame. Know this: these are what is meant by "all the grains," and these are to be taken for all rites. Siṃhaghrī, Vyāghrī, Karṇikā, Hasa Hasa, and Devā: for what is called "all the medicinal herbs," these five are to be known. Coral, gold, saleṃ, conch, pearl, and gem: for what is called "all the precious substances," these five are to be known.

Banners of various new kinds, eight in number, are to be hung and held ready on straight, long poles. In the eastern direction, set up a white one. In the southeast, set up a tawny one. In the southern direction, set up a black one. In the southwest, set up a smoke-colored one. In the western direction, set up a red one. In the northwest, set up a variegated one. In the northern direction, set up a yellow one. In the northeast, set up a yellow-green one. In this way the eight banners are to be set up in their proper order. The tops of the banners are to be adorned with a crest of peacock tail feathers. If the banners cannot be found, then one alone, or else even more than one, made entirely of ash, may be set up in the eastern direction. A cup made of unfired clay...

Make ten white ones from unspoiled fresh milk, and set them out in the directions and the intermediate directions, behind and likewise in front. If cups cannot be obtained, make the offering from small clay bowls. If even those cannot be obtained, then set a single one at the entrance and make the offering.

Let hitching posts adorned with garlands of flowers also be made in the four directions. Set out sprouts of barley, wheat, and other grains, well grown. Bells, parasols, yak-tail whisks, and strings of cord should likewise be hung in the four directions by the skilled one, outside the hitching posts and the rest, in order to beautify the place.

Spread out scattered flowers thoroughly, together with rice and parched grain. Outside the maṇḍalas, draw a maṇḍala of fine powder, square in shape. Whatever auspicious signs are renowned in this world, the skilled one should set them in the four directions outside the maṇḍalas.

Thus, whether in extended or in abbreviated form, arrange all this as far as one is able. When it has been done according to the rite, then begin the invitation.

The offering water follows the earlier rite. Having arranged it without distraction, the skilled one should invite the deities, each with its own mantra as is fitting, or else with the secret mantra of the lord of the maṇḍala, or with the essence mantra of all. The invitation is to be made just as is taught in the mantra tantras.

For the Tathāgata family, the skilled one invites with the Wheel-turner. Or the rite of invitation may also be performed with Buddhalocanā. For all the lotus family of Vajrapāṇi's retinue, invite with the Vidyārāja. Or the rite of invitation may be performed with Śrī Devī, who accomplishes all actions. For the vajra-holder family, the skilled one may use the secret mantra of Gnodmdzes, or, without distraction, perform the rite of invitation with Māmakī.

Whatever mantra is that of the lord of the mantra tantra, with that or with its essence, pronouncing the names of the deities, the skilled one performs the rite of invitation. Or else, with whatever mantra belongs to one's own family, either that or its essence, or in whatever way the rite is taught, the skilled one should make the invitation. Or one may invite with whatever rite is taught, or with one's own secret mantra, whether outer or inner, or in whatever way one is able. Follow the rite of the offering water.

Having made the invitation in this way, offer the water repeatedly. Then perform the rite of washing the feet, and, with the invocation "Sugata" and the like, and with respectful prostrations, having done these in order, the skilled one begins the offerings.

First offer perfumed unguent, and after that offer flowers. Then, having settled the mind well in equipoise, offer incense and divine food as well. Sandalwood, aloe, saffron, blue lotus, resin incense, priyaṅgu, and likewise lishi, tree cinnamon, dry fragrant herbs, and the compound perfumes, nāgapuṣpa, gānāmbu, granthe, suka, the sweet-scented patra, la, nersar, and the rest; stone-fragrance, śatapuṣpa, the leaves of the nose-herb, tsarong, ko-un, timdu, rika, ngyanyaka, tsola, and other excellent substances. Fruits and decoctions in their varieties: when the skilled ones have compounded these here, the wise and intelligent one, to all the deities outer and inner, in due order, praises them with the secret mantra and offers the perfumed unguent.

Parts of living creatures must not be mixed in. Resin, spirits, and the like must not be mixed in. Foul substances must not be mixed in. Nor may it be mixed with roots. For the Buddha in particular, offer a perfumed unguent made of saffron, or black aloe of sweet scent, anointed with fragrance. To the noble Avalokiteśvara, offer white sandalwood abundantly. To Vajrapāṇi and his retinue, offer red sandalwood. To all the others, having offered perfumed unguents generally as is fitting, make offerings of flowers that grow on dry land and those that grow in water. Mālatī, vākula, kunda...

Mālatī, vākula, kunda, campaka, kāñcanapuṣpa, priyaṅgu, yūthikā, utpala, kesara, sālatilaka, the flowering utpala tree, karṇikāra, tagara, karavīra, and ajiḍoka, kadamba, bindu, and kataraka, kāñcana and pāṭala, śitagandhi, kuravaka, vana, and the giṅśuka: knowing the rite, offer these and the like, the flowers that grow on dry land, in due order and in abundance, and avoid the inferior ones.

Gandha, kuya, śigmu, puṣpapati, muktaka, agoladraṅka, nipa, ketaka, manayan, kuranta, dāmaka, kuṭi, vala, and mālikā: these and others of inauspicious scent should be used in wrathful rites.

White lotus and red lotus, the various kinds of utpala, kumuda, and the other water-born flowers should be used in the maṇḍala rites. The red kumuda likewise, and the white seu-gandhi, together with other flowers of unpleasant scent, are to be used in wrathful rites.

Kesara, karṇikāra, mālatī, and white flowers of sweet fragrance should be offered especially to the family of the Tathāgata. The water-born flowers such as the lotus, the wise offer to the lotus family. Aśoka, kuṭiti, tilaka, likewise nāpamālikā, priyaṅgu, kuṭa, tapara, karavīra, and tragtraka, and also the blue utpala, should be offered to the vajra family.

To the family of the Tathāgata, offer also sandalwood and aloe incense. The wise offer śrīveṣṭa and similar resins to the lotus family. Incense of black aloe and guggul pleases the vajra family.

Incense in general is a substance free of parts of living creatures. Sandalwood, camphor, aloe, turuṣka, white resin, śrīveṣṭa, sarjarasa, bobs, rasa, guggul, śallakī, uśīra, and lavaka, sprangs-spos, glasgang, camphor, devadāru, and thang-shing: gathering as many of such substances as there are, the wise should combine them with raw sugar. Incense of this kind is offered to the deities in due order. Any one of these, or other fragrant substances taught as such, combined with many ingredients, is to be offered as incense to the maṇḍalas.

As prescribed in the maṇḍala rite, with the foundation and with the mind, do well whatever is available of the incense, flowers, and other offerings. If flowers have been strung by a flower-seller and a few inferior ones are among them, it is not contradictory; but if there are many, discard them. Unguents of unknown composition the wise should not offer to the maṇḍala. What has been touched by parts of living creatures should not be used to perfume others. Incense such as resin should not be offered in virtuous rites. Knowing this procedure, strive in the work of the rite.

In the resin cups placed outside, and in the bowls announced as ritual vessels, one may place whatever one wishes, even substances combined with parts of living creatures. As for the worldly gods whom one propitiates outside the maṇḍala, the wise should likewise offer incense and unguent as one wishes.

To the lords of the families, make a special offering. After that, make offerings to all the deities in order of rank. For the lords of the families, set out three incense vessels as well. In the center, place one incense vessel, so that the smoke of the incense continues unbroken. At each level of the maṇḍala, place one incense vessel. From that point on, always offer incense throughout.

Or else, for all in common, place one incense vessel, and having repeatedly performed the purifying smoke and the torma offering, then offer the incense. After that, in the maṇḍala, offer the water of homage to all the deities. Then, reciting the mantra in the mind,

Offer the food offerings well. Offer them according to one's means, clean, and in proper and equal portions, following the order of the maṇḍala. Let the wise practitioner prepare them with earnest effort. To the lords of the families, make a special offering. To the lord of the maṇḍala, offer the food offerings doubled. To those below, in due order, the wise one offers less than that. In the intervals between offerings, one may offer special things as one wishes. If the offering foods are excellent, clean, and richly abundant, all the deities in the maṇḍalas become greatly pleased and gratified.

Among the things to be offered, if some should run short, then for the others the wise practitioner offers the food offerings by apportioning what is at hand. If the offering is extremely meager, offer it to the lord of the family. Or else, offer it entire to the center of the maṇḍala, as a common offering to all. Or, whatever is arranged, the wise practitioner may offer all of it in the first, the second, or the third maṇḍala. Since this is in no way different from the families themselves, there is no fault whatsoever. Before beginning the maṇḍalas, one should examine the matter with care and with the proper equipment.

First, spread leaves or petals of water-lotus and the like. Offer first the chewable foods such as svastikas, and likewise the edibles such as cooked rice, in due order. After that, offer sugar candy, roots, fruits, and so forth. From among the torma offerings, offer also fragrant and excellent chewable foods of many kinds, made from barley and wheat.

There are many kinds of sweet cakes, such as laḍḍu, laba, pena, maduśirśa, snigdhakhura, aśovarta, śrīkadā, tilaka, parpaṭa, and parpa, raca, hasaguha, karpoda, karika, puṣaparta, havi, pūrṇa, and likewise śithe, varti, puṣpaveti, bittakha, kharjūra, sarjaka, mandaka, jalitivika, śaskula, and motaka, many oily preparations with sugar, ulobiga and kula, likewise glangsna, māṣa-fritters and the like, śuskaka, leaf-shaped cakes, vartaka, bereka, svayalika, dvace, and others of such many kinds. These chewable foods are to be offered here.

Then there are kṛsara, milk porridge, rice porridge mixed with water, curd, and porridge of parched grain, colored red or yellow and so on. These are to be placed on spread leaves and offered from bowls. Next, offer generously a measure of sixty-day rice or sāli rice, or well-cooked grain. Then offer broths of many kinds, well seasoned and fragrant, such as lentil broth and the like. Offer rice mixed with curd, and sugar-rice, from bowls.

The wise practitioner may offer the food offerings with whatever good foods are available. One who knows the rite should provide the foods for all beings in the three whites, in great abundance and variety, as is suitable. Rice with butter, curd, and milk are called the three whites. Milk porridge, kṛsara, and rice mixed with broth are named as food for all beings. The great and abundant offering with many chewable foods is mixed with barley porridge and has many varieties.

Thus, offer the six kinds of food as far as one is able. Avoid what is foul-smelling, rancid, bitter, or hot, broths that have stood overnight, and anything of inauspicious appearance. If broths cannot be obtained, offer lentil broth alone. Curd should always be poured over the top of the rice. Milk porridge, māṣa-lentil broth, curd, rice, svastika, and kṛsara, these six should never be omitted from the torma rite. Even in the torma rite of the poor, only these six are to be spoken of. If even one of them is missing, the torma rite is impaired. Add honey into the milk porridge.

Likewise, add curd and molasses. Never add butter into the lentil broth. If one has them, add also thin gruel, rice-water, and roots, and offer these arranged together in varied form. The deities, and especially the secret mantras, delight in this.

Mango, jackfruit, Nepalese apple, grape, pomegranate, rgya-shug, tintuka, kapittha, bīja-pūra, naranga, panasa, sour tree-fruit, lakucha, tree-rice, bhavya, vara, rta, śiri, rose-apple, skyuru-ra, karamarda, tavarīya, and other such fruits that have ripened in their many kinds: the wise should offer these with reverence in the torma rite.

Coconut, bilva fruit, palmyra fruit, and apples, and the fruits of such trees whose fruit grows in a cluster, these should be avoided. Peeled, fine pieces of root, the tubers of stones, bitā and ral and the like, should all be offered. The root of suran, karyadutanta itself, and such tubers as these should be avoided by those who do not know them. The best of fruits is the Nepalese apple, the best of tubers is vidārī. The wise should arrange these and offer them in the maṇḍalas.

Various kinds of pulses, and sesame mixed with salt, these should be offered, in due order, to the deities of the outer circle of the maṇḍala. Then spread the maṇḍala with white flowers, sesame, and parched rice. The torma for the directions, from the Mathara, should be given widely in all directions, with parched rice and sesame, cooked rice, flowers, and water, and with pulses, and made abundant. The master, taking in his hand such a torma, made with butter and spices, should offer it three times in each of the directions and intermediate directions as the command directs. He should also give offering water and incense to the rākṣasas, the flesh-eaters, the elemental spirits, and the corpse-eaters, and to beings of every kind; the wise should scatter the torma in all directions. Whomever the mind recalls, to all of these give the torma. For the beings of that region, those dwelling in trees and thickets, when the offering substances are scattered, if a jackal's cry suddenly sounds, then remain in unwavering equipoise there and give the torma again and again.

If a jackal's cry, a great roar, the appearance of elemental spirits, the breaking of tree branches and the like, the sound of thunder, and other such wondrous omens should arise there, then give the torma as is fitting and perform the work of protection. Whatever one has heard, however one has understood, whatever one has seen, in due order, so one should give the torma to all the deities in the directions.

Having thus given the directional torma and washed the hands well, and having touched the water, the wise one should give incense outside. Then, entering within, he should offer the offering water as before, perfume with incense, and mentally offer the offering foods. To all the deities of the central maṇḍala, with great earnestness, offer a pair of fine white cloths to each one. If one has the means, offer a pair of cloths to all the deities. If one lacks the means, offer a pair to each of the lords of the three families. Or else, one who knows the rite should place one pair of fine cloths upon the disciple in the center of the maṇḍala, offer it, and dedicate it to all.

Then recite the secret mantra of each one seven times. Recite the secret mantra of the principal deity of the maṇḍala one hundred and eight times. Or recite the heart mantras of the families one hundred times each. Then recite the mudrās of each, reciting thrice for each, in order. Or else the general mudrā should be shown separately to each one.

When this is done, the deities are pleased, they bestow blessings and grant their accomplishments.

Press the palms together firmly, and bend the two index fingers slightly. This should be known as the pledge-mudrā of the Tathāgata family.

Join the palms well, and spread the three middle fingers apart. This is the lotus mudrā, which has the mark of an opening lotus.

Cross the two hands behind the back, and twine together the two little fingers and the two thumbs. This is the vajra mudrā, and it is taught for the vajra family.

For all the maṇḍalas, the mudrās of the three pledges are taught for the three families, and are proclaimed to be general to all.

The works of protection and the binding of the directions, the urging of the deities, the rite of empowerment, the turning back of obstructing spirits, the casting of flowers and the like, likewise the pacifying of enemies, the subduing of harmful spirits, the binding and the releasing: all this is explained fully and correctly in the chapter on the mudrās. In the maṇḍalas of those deities, one should distinguish the rites and perform them accordingly.

All the secret mantras taught earlier, together with their mudrās, should be applied here according to the rite, for protection and the other purposes. For harmful spirits in particular, one sets the boundary with the vajra hammer. In the maṇḍalas of harmful spirits, one should also apply the eighteen mudrās that are taught.

Summon with the vajra hook. Bind with the vajra chain. Subdue with the vajra fist, the vajra threat. Strike with the vajra cymbals. Set the great wrathful one, the mighty one, to hold the pledge. The vidyā king, Handsome Destroyer of Harm, together with his mudrā, vanquishes harmful spirits.

Against the most violent spirits, the application of the vajra hammer calls for great diligence, power, and skill, and by itself alone it accomplishes all rites. The mudrās applied in rites against harmful spirits blaze without remainder, and their power and strength become especially manifest there. Therefore, to subdue harmful spirits, apply these mudrās with effort. For other rites too, apply them as you see fit to the work.

Then, with kindled sticks of fuel, make the fire offering into the blazing fire. Facing east, seated upon a mat of kuśa grass, enter equipoise. Spread the kuśa grass and perform the purification, circling to the right. Kindle the offering fire with the sticks. At the beginning and at the end, offer to each deity separately the burnt offering of butter, with the ladle of oblation and the filling ladle.

Wherever a recitation has been prescribed, the fire offering is likewise taught. Or else, for each deity individually, perform it with the pacifying mantra. Recalling all the secret mantras in order, one by one, burn seven offerings of butter for each, and again and again make the purifying offering. Finally, having purified the fire, offer one hundred and eight burnt offerings with the secret mantra of pacification, and ask all the deities for their forbearance.

With the mind filled with faith, offer incense in the maṇḍala. Then praise the lords of the families well. Confess misdeeds with reverence, and rejoice in merit. Having trained thus, make whatever aspirations you wish, and take refuge in the Three Jewels again and again with reverence. Keeping in mind the irreversible Saṅgha and the assemblies of vidyā mantras and secret mantras, again and again generate the awakening mind.

When this is done, read a little from a scripture. And having properly performed the rite of inviting the deities to the maṇḍala, the text continues.

Offer incense without interruption, and again and again present the offering water. Having performed this rite, bow also to the deities. The wise one, by means of this rite, should properly accept the disciples. Summon the disciples one by one, perform the cleansing and the scattering of the offering cake as before, and having bestowed perfumed ointment and the like, praise them with the essence mantra. Then, with the secret mantra that accomplishes all actions, cover the face with a cloth that has been empowered by it. Place flowers upon the mudrā taught earlier.

Then place the mantra of the lord of the maṇḍala, together with its mudrā, upon the crown of the head. Recite the secret mantra three times, and beseech the blessing of its truth: "Since I have properly led this disciple into the maṇḍala, may the order of the divine families descend upon him in accord with whatever his merit may be. Whatever accomplishment is achieved through this, whatever family he becomes a vessel for, whatever the power of his merit may be, so may it be in this maṇḍala."

Having spoken thus, lead him to the direction of the door, have him stand there, and cause him to scatter the flower. Wherever the flower falls, that is declared to be his family. Then remove the face-cloth and show him the excellent maṇḍala.

Then the master, delighted, instructs the disciple: "Look upon this excellent maṇḍala. Now generate great faith. You are born into the family of the buddhas, and have been blessed by mantra and vidyā. All the fortunes of beings, and all accomplishments as well, will become manifest to you. For the sake of accomplishment, guard the samaya vows, and also strive in the secret mantras."

Then the disciple himself, filling his cupped hands with flowers, dedicates them to the three families, makes prostrations, and scatters the flowers three times. At that time the master, in that maṇḍala, bestows his own mantra, or the essence mantra, upon the disciple, who receives it and recites it in both maṇḍalas.

The three levels of accomplishment, superior, middling, and inferior, are discerned from where the flower falls, examining the distinctions of the deities and the distinctions of the place. If the flower falls upon the head of the Buddha, the Blessed One, then the mantras of the uṣṇīṣa and the tuft of hair between the brows will without fail be accomplished. If it falls upon the face, the mantras of the eye and the other such deities will be accomplished. If it falls on the upper body, the supreme accomplishments are achieved. If it falls on the waist, the middling ones are achieved. If it falls on the lower body, the ordinary accomplishments are achieved. If it falls upon the middle of the body, the essence mantras and the like are achieved. If it falls on the lower part, the mantras of attendants and messengers and the like are achieved. In this same order, apply it also to all the families of the lotus and the vajra. Likewise for the other deities, the accomplishments are explained as threefold.

If the flower falls far from the forms of the deities, its accomplishment will be long delayed. If near, the accomplishment is quickly achieved. As far as the offerings of the secret mantra are spread, that is the boundary of the maṇḍala. The family of whichever deity the flower falls upon is the disciple's family. If the flower falls between two deities, he is said to belong to the family of whichever one it is nearer to.

If someone's flower, having passed beyond the first maṇḍala, falls elsewhere, he will achieve only ordinary accomplishments and his faith is very small. If a discarded flower falls on the drawn outline of the root enclosure, perform a pacifying rite, and then, with great effort, have him cast the flower again. If at that time there is doubt, the wise one should not have him recite and cast again, for nothing is certain there, and through it he will not attain accomplishment. If the flower falls between the two, or in vain outside, then after performing the pacifying fire offering, have the flowers scattered again. If the flower falls upon the essence mantra deity, then...

It is taught that it will never be in vain, as in the rite of the threads. By this the ground and the assembly should be known. For the three families as well, proceed according to the rite. Examine the maṇḍala in three forms. From the ways in which things abide, bring forth the principal deities in sequence. If the flower falls in the center, the perfection of wisdom, or if it is equal for the principal of the maṇḍala and the two door guardians, then the essence mantra is well suited to him as his domain of practice.

If the flowers that have been cast should fall upon the offerings, this should be understood especially as the sign of the expansive accomplishments. If a flower falls upon the lord of the maṇḍala, then all his rites will be swiftly accomplished and will become supreme. If a flower falls upon the Buddha, the Blessed One, then for him the secret mantras of all three families will be accomplished, without fail. If it falls upon the holder of the lotus, two families are accomplished. If it falls upon the holder of the vajra, his own family is accomplished. Or else, it should be known that the secret mantra is accomplished just as one would propitiate the deity.

If anyone has passed beyond the second and third and gone away, he should be removed from that maṇḍala, or else be admitted into another maṇḍala. In such ways, when the flowers have been cast, if the flower falls in front of oneself, one should undertake a pacifying rite. Having pacified by means of the fire offering, have him cast it again. If after three attempts the flower still does not fall, then, cutting off his hopes, send him away. The wise one should take in all disciples by this rite.

Having urged them on, offer flowers, fragrances, and the rest to the maṇḍala. Summon the disciples one at a time, present the offering of gifts according to the rite, and the one who knows the rite should perform the purification and the torma offering. Placing him on the left side, take his right hand by the thumb with your left hand, and with the secret mantra of the lord of the maṇḍala, the wise one should make seven fire offerings of ghee, seven times each. Then, with the pacifying secret mantra, make seven fire offerings of ghee. Then, as the disciple circles around with the ladle, make seven fire offerings. Then, having bound him with a thread and performed the purification and torma offering as before, touch his heart, recite the mantra, and let him go as he wishes. This rite has been taught for all disciples.

In the fire offering rite, with butter and with the ladle likewise, with kuśa water and kuśa seats, and likewise the kuśa purifier, and also the kuśa spread, all of these should be prepared for the fire offering rite. For the offering firewood of wood, kindle the fire after smearing it with butter. Then burn moist sticks of yam wood there; in this way burn them in the fire offerings. As many fire offerings of ghee as there are, make the same number of fire offerings of sesame. Having burned as much rice as desired, at the end make the filling offering in the same way. Invoking the fire and sending it off should be done with one's own secret mantras. The purification and torma offering for it should be done with the secret mantras of the respective rite. In the maṇḍala, whatever secret mantras have been taught for the fire offering, with these, according to the rite, the wise one should perform the fire offering there.

Next I shall explain, especially, the other fire offering rites: the pacifying, the enriching, and likewise the wrathful and forceful rites. In accordance with the rite, draw the maṇḍala as prescribed, and with these materials set in equipoise, distinguish the fire offering rites. Facing north is for pacifying; facing east is for enriching; facing south one should begin the wrathful fire offering rite. For all rites the hearth is round, square, or triangular, and it is proclaimed in three colors: white, yellow, and black. For the pacifying rite the seat is a lotus; for the enriching rite, a kuśa-grass mat. For the wrathful and forceful rite, there is no seat, and one performs it pressing foot upon foot.

For the three rites, one should perform the pacifying, the enriching, and likewise the wrathful. The wise should act according to the rite exactly as it appears in the sūtra. For pacifying, the fuel sticks are tipped with tender shoots; for the rite of enriching, they are from the middle of the branch; for all wrathful and forceful rites, they are from the root. Thus the fuel sticks are explained as of three kinds.

For the pacifying rite, one performs it wearing kuśa grass, leaves, and the like. For enriching, one wears fine cloth, such as dugūla, which is known to be yellow. For the wrathful rite, one performs it in black clothing, splashed with blood. Or else one begins wearing old, soiled clothing, or naked.

Barley, honey, milk, butter, rice, milk porridge, durvā grass and sprouts, all kinds of sandalwood, the leaves of the cūta tree, the udumbara fig, the aśvattha, the palāśa, and likewise kindling sticks of milk-bearing trees, and all such things, are the substances for the pacifying fire offering.

Milk porridge, curd, the palm of the hand, milk, white barley, sesame in its three kinds mixed together, the lamp tree, śuta, the nyeu tree, the black puṣpa, bilva fruit, grains of all sorts, and kindling sticks, and the substances of this kind are explained for the enriching fire offerings.

White mustard seed, blood, white mustard with butter, and likewise poison, powdered bone, ashes from the charnel ground, likewise cut human hair, kodrava grain, charred firewood, the ariṣṭa, and thorny kindling sticks and the like are explained as substances for the wrathful and forceful rites. Though these are not taught in the mantra tantras, the wise should apply them to extremely wrathful rites, in accordance with the rite.

Having performed the fire offering rite, once one has recognized that the disciple is fit to receive empowerment, one should carry out the rite of empowerment earnestly, according to the rite. Spread a fresh seat that has been consecrated with the secret mantra that accomplishes all rites. Having done all the auspicious preparations and taken great care in protection, recite the mantra of the maṇḍala. Over the head hold a fine white parasol adorned with a garland of white flowers, and hold a hanging white cloth. The disciple offers a generous gift, and having honored the lama with service, seats the master on the seat. With the mantra, remove faults and make auspiciousness.

Fumigate with a well-prepared incense; fumigate with the incense of the king of wrathful ones. Hold fans and the like, and hold a parasol over the head. Fans of yak tail, incense, a hat, and clothing are given to the disciples. Along with these, arrange and set out the four vases. Proclaim very auspicious verses, likewise recite broad auspicious blessings, and sound cymbals, songs and melodies, and drums that herald prosperity.

In brief, having performed an extensive rite of this kind, the wise one, with the mind, makes request to all the deities of the maṇḍala. Having recited a hundred repetitions over the vase and taken it up well, one slowly circumambulates the maṇḍala three times. Reciting all the root mantras, the one endowed with intelligence bestows the empowerment.

Then, having bound the mudrā, one touches the mantra to the crown of the head with the mind. The intelligent one who is to become a holder of the mantra lineage bestows the empowerment. For a disciple endowed with every good quality, perform the rite facing west. For pacifying, face north; for the rite of enriching, face east; and for wrathful and forceful practices, likewise, face south and perform it with diligence.

Having thus bestowed the empowerment, dress the disciple in new garments, and make offerings of flowers, perfumes, and the like. For the sake of the offering, there are also a banner and a streamer. Then the lama himself holds a parasol over the disciple's head. With palms joined, one has the disciple circumambulate the maṇḍala well. With the parasol, at the directional doors, one has the disciple bow the head and prostrate.

"This disciple, who is to become a holder of the secret mantra tantras, has been presented to you." Having spoken thus, the preceptor sets the parasol aside, receives the disciple well with his own hands, and then should instruct him in this way:

"Now you shall become a maṇḍala master, and you shall also become a holder of the secret mantra tantras. Honored by all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and gods, and out of tender compassion for sentient beings, you must diligently draw the maṇḍala according to the rite. Join the practitioner as well to the tantra."

Having instructed him thus, the preceptor then performs the fire offering for the sake of that disciple, as before. Into a fire of yama wood, with the secret mantra of the lord of the maṇḍala, make one hundred fire offerings of butter. In the same way, with the pacifying mantra, make also one hundred offerings of sesame mixed with curd, honey, and butter. When the fire offering is finished, sprinkle the crown of the disciple's head with that same water, and perform the purifying and the offering of torma.

Then the maṇḍala should be shown to him in full detail. The great mudrās should also be shown. Have him recite the king of knowledge-mantras, and have him repeat, as far as he is able, what the lama teaches, according to the rite.

Then the wise disciple, filling his cupped hands with flowers, should make offerings to the mantras and the deities in due order. The master remains at the place of the fire offering, joyful and reverent, mindful of the Three Jewels. At that time, whatever gift the lama desires should be offered with a mudrā. Offer to the master oneself and all one's possessions, all the people under one's command together with wealth and those who travel on foot. Or else, if the master is pleased by wealth, or by whatever else delights him, or by whatever one's own heart wishes, offer that to the lama. Or if one is poor, one may please the lama with acts of honor and service. For all masters, the practice of honoring and serving is taught as a worthy offering. First offer a pair of cloths, and afterward carry out all these rites.

The disciple who wishes to accomplish the secret mantra, in order to make offerings to the lama, and who guards the samaya commitments, should offer to the lamas as gifts clothing, gold, himself, his children, and all his possessions.

Then the lama arranges the disciples well, with minds undistracted, has them recite the Perfection of Wisdom, and instructs them in these samaya commitments:

"From this day forward, you must rely with faith on the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, on the bodhisattvas, and on the assemblies of knowledge-mantras and secret mantras. Always have special devotion to the great mudrā. Be respectful toward those who hold the samaya, toward your companions, and toward the lama. Do not hold hatred toward any of the gods. Make offerings at the proper seasons. Do not honor the texts of other teachers. Always make offerings to unexpected guests. Establish firmly a mind of loving-kindness toward living beings. Delight in the vehicle, and exert yourselves in accumulating merit. Through diligence in recitation, strive in the practice of secret mantra. Guard also the samaya commitments taught in the secret mantra tantras. To those without samaya, do not give mantras or mudrās. Guard the secret mantra tantras well, and realize them yourselves."

Having thus instructed him in the samaya, show him his own mudrās, give him the knowledge-mantra of his own family, and explain the maṇḍalas as well.

Then, having washed hands and mouth and presented offering water to the deities, offer incense to all of them in due order according to the rite. Then, with the knowledge-mantra of the maṇḍala, offer one hundred and eight fire offerings. With the pacifying mantra, offer one hundred and eight. With the essence mantra, offer twenty-one. And with whatever mantra has been taught, offer likewise.

Offer the fire offerings separately, each with its own butter. After that, with one's own mantra, make the fire offerings as one wishes. Then give the directional torma offerings. Having restrained oneself and washed hands and mouth, let the disciple, with flowers, incense, and the like, make offerings as he wishes. Together with the disciple, without distraction, bow respectfully with the head. Then, having presented incense and water, as taught in the passage on the vessel, send the deities back to their abodes, each with their own mantra, as is fitting.

The remains of the offerings should be gathered and cast into the great ocean. The foods, both hard and soft, should be given as one pleases to the destitute, but not even a little to dogs, crows, and the like.

All the articles of the ritual should be collected by the master and used by himself. They must not be shared out among the disciples. It is taught that all the articles of the maṇḍala belong to the master alone. If the disciple then uses them, he will fall away from the samaya. For one who does not wish to use them, this is the rite for it: offer them, in accordance with the rite, as articles for the Three Jewels. Parasols, banners, bells, and the like should be offered to the Buddha himself. Seats, incense, perfumes, and the like should be offered to the sacred Dharma. Robes, articles of use, vessels, and the like should be offered to the Saṅgha. The disciple should not take even the slightest part of these for himself. If there is no Saṅgha, give them to a monk, or else to a nun. If one does not wish to do that oneself, give them to lay practitioners.

Then, on the day after that, in order to pacify any remaining faults of conduct, the wise one should make one hundred and eight pacifying fire offerings.

Furthermore, whatever remaining rites for the maṇḍala have been taught in detail in all the tantras are here taught as supplementary instruction.

The master should be skilled in the secret mantra tantras, compassionate by nature, and endowed with moral discipline. He should be skilled in drawing maṇḍalas, upright, and very careful about purity. The site should be an empty house, plastered with a paste of stone-ash, clean, fine, and spacious. Even in a temple, draw the maṇḍala well, just as it has been described. As one builds a house to be lived in over water, so on a good plank laid over water, bound firmly together, one may draw the maṇḍala.

Land used for stūpas or offerings, and land in villages, filled with impurity, as well as ground previously used for other maṇḍalas, should be carefully avoided.

Some declare that for maṇḍalas one performs the rites alone. This is to be done by oneself, like the subterranean maṇḍala. In others, the rites are taught to be performed by the master with his assembled retinue. This too is done by oneself, like the wrathful maṇḍala. Where there are rites for which there is no ritual of one's own tradition, there the wise one should perform the rites taught in the general tantra.

The mantras for establishing the maṇḍala, as they have been proclaimed, should first each be recited ten thousand times. For whatever maṇḍala the wise one draws, having recited those mantras extensively, he should also, as a reminder, keep them close at hand in a book.

When bathing and the like, set aside the viewing of the maṇḍala; but while drawing the maṇḍala, never leave it unattended. When the time for the marking of lines arrives, even if no disciple is present, he should himself mark the lines by the rite of the peg.

For the tasks of the maṇḍalas, even if there is no companion, the wise one himself should perform the work in that same manner. Those who are sick, headstrong, lax in conduct, poor in cleanliness, or untrained, even if they have seen the tantras, should not be taken as companions.

But some who do not practice the Sugata's Dharma are of noble lineage, faithful, and upright.

Hearing of the maṇḍala, faith arises. If such a person should come suddenly, then, knowing that his faith is firm, even after the maṇḍala has been drawn, so as to introduce him to the teaching of it by oneself, that one should be brought in alone. And for the one who has made the preparations and remains in them, those very rites should be carried out promptly.

For a disciple who is at odds with the others, and where there is no proper ritual procedure, one should perform the pacifying rite as it has been taught. Royal men, courageous and bearing weapons in their hands, should stand guard. Having obtained permission from the lord of the land, the master should draw the maṇḍala.

Whichever disciple has been accepted, if at the time of the preparations he is not present, then, having made an image of him, one should perform the rites as they have been taught. If the accepted disciple, owing to some circumstance, has not come to that place, let others be set in his stead. If, after the preparations have been made, he does not come because of some circumstance, the wise and intelligent master should not accept any other disciple there. If, after the preparations have been made, a disciple does not come into the maṇḍala, the master will be struck by sickness and surely die.

If, because of some circumstance, the rite is delayed, and one day is interrupted, then, having performed a pacification on that day, one should again make the preparations. Even if precious articles are not obtained, one should never postpone. For if the master postpones, many harms will arise.

If some harm should arise while the maṇḍala is being drawn, one should turn it back by the power of the mantras that have been taught. If one is unable to turn it back even by that, then, having offered all the offering articles with purification and a scattering of torma, and having presented the offering water, one should request the deities to depart again. On the following day, the wise one should draw the maṇḍala just as before. Or else the wise one should thoroughly pacify it by the rite of the fire offering.

As for the maṇḍalas of the Seven Mothers and the maṇḍala of the yakṣas that have been taught, in setting up these and others one need not examine the faults in sequence. In those cases, in the same way, one should lay out the maṇḍala in full. From other rites that have been performed, apply this rite as is fitting. What has been taught in brief, what has been taught at length, what has been taught in passing, and what has been taught in general terms in the sūtras: for the rites to be performed, all these are explained at length in this tantra. By this rite the wise one should draw all maṇḍalas.

What has been explained in the sūtra of the great maṇḍala, one should elaborate as the rite. As the master has taught, as the ritual manuals have declared, and whatever sequence of rites has been explained in the disciplines of all secret mantra, the wise one should apply that rite to the rite of the maṇḍala accordingly. In the measures of secret mantra, where the vase and so forth have been taught, there too, by this rite, there is no fault in doing more.

Likewise, in the rites of secret mantra, the torma offerings for other deities, beyond what is explained in the maṇḍalas, may be added without fault. Therefore, wherever some detail has been read and taught, with a mind free of doubt, do all of it exactly so.

In some places it is taught that the disciples, together with the master, holding incense and lamps in their hands, circumambulate the maṇḍala together. And when the samaya words are taught, the disciples enter the place of the rite and cast flowers, as is specially taught. Wherever some such rites are briefly explained, one should do them with joy and delight, but one need not apply all of them everywhere.

From seeing the families of deities, the empowerments are of four kinds. The master, abiding in meditative equipoise, should know these and perform them as is fitting.

For the sake of the master attaining his rank, the first is proclaimed in full. For the sake of accomplishing the vidyā-mantras, the second is well explained. For the sake of utterly crushing the obstructing spirits, the third is thoroughly proclaimed. For the sake of obtaining prosperity, the fourth, the extensive rite, is taught.

First, the extensive rite is what I have taught at the outset. The rite of empowerment into the three families I shall also explain here in brief.

The disciple who has seen the family of his deity, and who wishes to recite whichever vidyā-mantra, should be empowered with the vase over which that mantra has been recited one hundred and eight times. By that very mantra he should perform the fire offering, and that very mantra he should also recite. One who is empowered in this way has received the second rite of empowerment.

The pacifying of those whose minds are tormented by obstructing spirits is the third empowerment, and it is taught to bring benefit and happiness.

In the maṇḍala of Śrī and the other deities, there is empowerment for gaining kingship, for removing misfortune, for increasing glory, and for increasing wealth and offspring. Whatever empowerments there are of this kind, know that these are the ones that bestow prosperity on people of the fourth class.

One who receives the first empowerment becomes one who is regarded with care by the buddhas. As their child, he will be revered by those who strive in the practice of secret mantra. Many vidyā-mantras and secret mantras, and the noble Avalokiteśvara, and the heroic Vajradhara will themselves bless him. If he is joined to the practice through them, the practitioner will accomplish all his actions. He cannot be overcome by anything, and even the gods will make offerings to him. Wandering in saṃsāra, he will not fall into the lower realms. He will not be born with deficient limbs, in poverty, or among those who are despised. He will remember his past lives, have great enjoyments, be possessed of moral discipline, and be handsome in form. He will always take birth in the higher realms among gods and humans. By the power of that merit, he will never turn back from the awakening of a buddha. Before long he will complete the accumulations for awakening. He is endowed with these and many other vast qualities. He is born into the family of the vidyā-mantras, and he engages in the conduct of awakening.

When one has been empowered in this way, and the wise disciple has seen the tantra, and has received the transmission from the guru, one should draw the maṇḍalas.

One who lacks these qualities and yet draws maṇḍalas will fall into the unbearable hell. His disciples too will gain nothing. Famine, many illnesses, drought, and harm will arise; kings will wage wars; and fears of thieves and bandits will appear. Through these and their causes, his disciples too will be ruined. If a maṇḍala is drawn without the proper rite, the guru will surely die.

One who has been properly empowered in the maṇḍala of the Tathāgata family becomes a master of the maṇḍalas of all three families. One who is empowered in the maṇḍala of the noble Avalokiteśvara is empowered as a master of the maṇḍalas of two families. One who is empowered in the maṇḍala of Vajrapāṇi of great splendor becomes a master of the maṇḍala of the single vajra family. Whatever maṇḍalas of the Mothers and of the fierce yakṣas have been taught, all of these too he should draw without doubt.

The guru should empower disciples in the maṇḍalas one at a time. The wise should never empower two disciples at once. But the guru may empower two, or three, or even four.

The remaining implements, the new ones, should all be made one by one, each separately. To one who has received the empowerment of the awareness mantras, the empowerment into the maṇḍala of accomplishment should be given. The rite of empowerment and likewise the rite of accomplishment should be bestowed. To the disciple who knows the pledges, and to others as well, one gives one's own mantra, together with the rite and together with the mudrā, bestowed with the full and extensive ritual.

Whoever recites mantras without having properly seen the maṇḍala will not attain accomplishment. If he dies, he will fall into the lower realms. And whoever teaches that person the mantras, mudrās, and rites, that teacher too, having broken the pledges, goes to the hell of Wailing.

If one has broken any of the pledges as they have been taught, one should recite one's own essence mantra a hundred thousand times. Or else one may recite the dhāraṇī that confuses with fire a thousand times. Or one may perform a pacifying fire offering. Or one may enter the maṇḍala again.

A person who, through the power of delusion and out of ignorance, makes inquiries about the maṇḍala will go to a state like that of the five deeds of immediate retribution. But whoever, performing meritorious action, properly inquires about the rite becomes a bodhisattva of great power and is born in an excellent place within the desire realm.

Murderers, and the risen corpses, and flesh-eaters, and great hungry-bellied ones, and the various kinds of spirits, and obstructing demons who inspire terror, will never gain a foothold against one who has seen the family of the deity and knows the pledges. The unvirtuous actions of such a person are cleared away, and he will never fall into the lower realms. If he practices with this, then without doubt all secret mantras will be accomplished. In him there is no doubt that the seed of awakening will become firm.

The master, of great intelligence, who upholds the secret mantra tantras, and whose disciple is disciplined and compassionate, should with firm diligence generate one and accomplish. This rite of all the maṇḍalas is supreme. The wise should draw the maṇḍalas by means of this rite. All the maṇḍalas of the kings of awareness mantras and of the great mudrās are such. Having given the mantra to the disciple, the guru then bestows this tantra. One requests: please come to the maṇḍala of empowerment.

This completes the full presentation, according to the Great Accomplishment Tantra of Action, of all the procedures for the maṇḍala.

Here ends the General Rite of All Maṇḍalas, the General Secret Tantra, taught by the great lord Vajrapāṇi himself, which sets out the great maṇḍala in successive stages.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The passage matches the Sarvamaṇḍalasāmānyavidhi-guhyatantra. In the opening lines, the phrase translated "the maṇḍala of the Unconquerable One" renders a name (Ajita, Maitreya) that may also be read generically. "Root of the Lotus family" and "the Subduer" for the name beginning the three thousand maṇḍalas (rnam par gnon pa) are literal renderings and are somewhat opaque. The final line, "desiring the asuras," is syntactically obscure in the Tibetan, and the intended sense is uncertain.  The opening lines are terse and somewhat obscure; I have kept them close to the literal wording. The four-line passage on the three tutelary figures (Victor's Crown, Guide of Peace, Wrathful One of Great Power) refers to the three family-lords of this tantra, which I have not tried to identify by Sanskrit name. The seasonal dating at the end is rendered by its plain sense. The passage breaks off mid-sentence, as in the source.  The passage ends mid-sentence in the astrological enumeration. The rendering of the weekday and planet names (ཕུར་བུ་, ཟླ་བ་, པ་བ་སངས་, ཉི་མ་བཟང་, རྒྱལ་, སྐག་, ས་ག་) is conjectural, since the source mixes planetary, weekday and lunar-mansion terms, and the last line is left tentatively rendered. The line about the one "to be drawn" (བདེག་པ) is also uncertain, possibly a corrupt reading. "Lotus-Holder" translates ཕྱག་ན་པདྨ, referring to Padmapāṇi/Avalokiteśvara.  This passage is heavily corrupt and obscure, especially the list of deities and mansions near the opening. My renderings of that list (Abhiṣeka, Vijaya, Jayakṛt, Prabhā, Raktā, Dhanavatī, Bhadrā, Varuṇā, Brahmā, Dveṣa, Maṅgala, Viṣṇu, Maitreya, Pāva, Sanghā) are tentative reconstructions of the Tibetan names, and the sense of several is doubtful. The line about the "Lord of Beings and Maitreya of the last lunar mansion" may refer to Prajāpati and a mansion such as Revatī. The measure of the maṇḍala, "twelve finger-widths," follows the Tibetan literally. The Great Wrathful One is kept as in the Tibetan, without identification.  The verses on disciple qualities contain some obscure Tibetan renderings. In particular, the terms rendered as "given to inviting others to share what he has" and "capable of recounting what he has learned" are uncertain and may be refined against the Sanskrit. The phrase "four assemblies" is translated literally from the text without further interpretation. In the last verses on motives for entering the maṇḍala, the Tibetan is compressed and the contrast between this-worldly and other-worldly aims is rendered cautiously.  The opening line is textually difficult. The count "twenty up to five" is likely corrupt; I preserved the sense that the number should not be an even pair. The names of the mantra deities are rendered by identification: the ten-syllable lotus-family king is Hayagrīva (the Tibetan has "horse-neck"); the Great Power with four Hūṃ is a vajra-family wrathful figure, whom I did not name more specifically. "Pāyā" translates a transcribed name of the Lord of Secrets, which is uncertain. The final lines are somewhat elliptical and rendered with minimal interpretive filling. The passage is cut off mid-sentence in the source.  This passage closes the rite of requesting the deities' presence and then gives the dream-omen divination after the disciples' night on kuśa grass. The Tibetan "tomorrow" (sang) in the petition governs the maṇḍala to be drawn next day. Several lines list auspicious dream-objects with loose syntax; some items (for example the ambiguous "children of the Victors," rgyal ba'i sras, rendered literally) could also be read as bodhisattvas. The Sanskrit equivalents of a few animal and bird terms are not secure, so I have kept to plain English.  The verse beginning "bdag nyid me phyogs su" (the position of the master in the southeast) and the line "bden bral dbang ldan gra gnyis nas" refer to the southwest (Nirṛti) and northeast (Īśāna) corners; I have rendered these as directions. The line "ཁ་བསྒྱུར" regarding the thread, rendered "spun to the right," is somewhat uncertain; it may rather mean "twisted/turned" in a manner specified by the tradition. The line "རྒྱ་གྲམ་དུ་ནི་སྲད་བུ་བྲེ", rendered as laying the cord along the outer boundary, follows the standard sense of rgya gram as the border or outer limit.  The preceding passage ends mid-sentence; this passage also breaks off mid-sentence at the end, as the Tibetan does. The drug name written skyur ru ra (probably Skt. āmalaka or a similar fruit) is left untranslated, as its identification is uncertain. The "offering-tree" for the pegs (mchod sbyin shing) is rendered literally; the identification of the wood is uncertain. "Yam wood" renders yam shing, a doubtful reading. The goddess names Buddhalocanā (sangs rgyas spyan), Pāṇḍaravāsinī (rendering grags ldan ma, which in the lineage context is the lotus-family consort), and Māmakī follow the standard Kriyā-tantra triad; the Tibetan "grags ldan ma" is rendered as "the Famed One" in parentheses with Pāṇḍaravāsinī offered as the probable Sanskrit equivalent. The line about the master dying if the cord breaks, and similar omens, is rendered as given.  Several lines are obscure or likely corrupt: the "ནག་པོ་ཐལ་བ་དཀར་པོ" phrase (black and white ash), "ཆབ་སྒོ" (rendered water channel, perhaps a drainage or outlet feature), and the measurement of "three parts" and "two parts" are uncertain. The line "ཚ་དག" is rendered "lines" on a conjectural reading. The "hand of the knowledge-holder" (རིག་བྱེད་ལག་པ) may be a specific hand gesture; rendered literally.  The passage breaks off mid-sentence at the end, so the translation does the same. In the list of emblems, the Tibetan names several deities by epithet: དྲག་པོ (Fierce One, perhaps Rudra or Hayagrīva-type figure), དཀའ་ཟློག (Vighnāntaka), ཁྱབ་འཇུག (Viṣṇu), སྡེ་ཆེན (Mahāsenā), བདེན་བྲལ (Nairṛti), ཆུ་བདག (Varuṇa), ཀུ་བེ་ར (Kubera), དབང་བདག (Īśāna). The Sanskrit identifications follow the standard directional-guardian scheme. The "Fierce One" is the least certain.  Several names in the long list are not securely identified from the Tibetan alone. I rendered "Maitreya and the others" for the companions of the Fortunate Eon, and kept "Elephant" and "Spreader of Limbs" as literal translations of epithets, since a confident Sanskrit restitution is uncertain. Rabsim and Balavat, as renderings of the Rāhu-group names, are tentative. "Suvāhu" translates ལག་བཟངས, a standard identification. The "Seizer-goddess" (འཕྲོག་མ) is rendered literally for the female guardian drawn before the doors. The text breaks off mid-sentence, as the passage does.  Several proper names in the Tibetan lines on Vajrapāṇi's maṇḍala are transliterated or translated Sanskrit titles whose identification is uncertain, so I rendered them by their Tibetan sound or literal sense: Khutsur (Skt. perhaps Hūṃkāra or Huluhulu), Thabjor, Gompa Dorwa (literally "Casting Away the Step"), and Chölpa. Vajra Mesha is a literal rendering of "Vajra sheep-lineage" and Vajra Beconda likewise, based on the Tibetan. In the opening line, the Tibetan does not name the two items the wise one honors, so I kept it as "these two." The "Stem Array" is the Gaṇḍavyūha. Nirṛti is supplied from the Tibetan "southwest lacking-truth (bden bral)."  The text is a rite manual, and several terms are ambiguous. "Close touching" (ཉེ་རེག) is rendered literally, as the exact ritual act is unclear. "The descent of the horse" (རྟ་བབས) is also literal and uncertain. "The mantra of the disciple" in the instruction on dispelling faults is an uncertain reading of the Tibetan. The "essence maṇḍala" translates the maṇḍala of the heart-mantra deity. Some line divisions in the Tibetan are irregular, so a few sentence boundaries are interpretive.  Several terms in the lists are transliterated plant, jewel, and color names whose identification is uncertain: Siṃhaghrī, Vyāghrī, Karṇikā, and Hasa Hasa are rendered as transliterated, and saleṃ (the Tibetan sa le sbram) is left untranslated. Likewise le brgan (tawny) and khra bo (variegated) are provisional color renderings. The line about banners made "of ash" translates thal kar literally and may be corrupt or elliptical in the source. The passage breaks off mid-sentence at the cup of unfired clay, and the sentence presumably continues in the next passage.  Several lines in the plant list are transliterated Sanskrit or Tibetan-Sanskrit hybrids that cannot be securely identified (for example nāgapuṣpa, gānāmbu, granthe, tsarong, ko-un, timdu, rika, ngyanyaka, tsola); I have left them as transcribed rather than guess. The deity name rendered Gnodmdzes corresponds to the Tibetan gnod mdzes, probably a Sanskrit name for a vajra-family goddess; its identification is uncertain. The opening line, "ten white ones," refers back to vessels or offerings named in the preceding, partly lost passage, so its referent is inferred. The Wheel-turner refers to the Buddha-family mantra deity, probably Uṣṇīṣacakravartin or a related wheel-turning figure.  The Sanskrit flower and incense names are reconstructed from Tibetan transliterations and many are corrupt or uncertain. I have given them in plausible Sanskrit where clear and left others close to the Tibetan, since a listener needs only the sound. Some names (gandha, kuya, śigmu, bobs, thang-shing, sprangs-spos, glasgang) could not be confidently identified. The line about the "foundation and the mind" (ra-ba dang sems) is obscure and may be corrupt. The line on kuṭiti may refer to a different plant than rendered. The rendering "water of homage" is for mchod yon (Skt. arghya).  The long list of Indic food names is a transliterated catalogue of sweets and cakes, many of them corrupt in transmission. I have given Sanskritized forms and not translated them. Identifications beyond a few (laḍḍu, parpaṭa, kharjūra as dates, māṣa as black gram, kṛsara as rice-and-lentil gruel) are uncertain. The "three whites" are rendered as in the text's own gloss, and the six foods enumerated near the end follow the Tibetan list. The word rendered "leaf-shaped cakes" is a tentative reading.  Many of the fruit and tuber names are Sanskrit transliterations or phonetic renderings whose identification is uncertain, so I left several untranslated as transcribed. Some Tibetan forms are corrupt in transmission. "The Mathara" renders ma thar, which is unclear, and may be a place or a corrupted term. The word translated "thin gruel" (sgeʼu gsher) and "tree-rice" are tentative. The "tubers of stones" renders rdo gu, perhaps a kind of stony or hard root. The offering lines about cloths and the "lords of the three families" follow the standard Kriyā tantra division of Tathāgata, Lotus, and Vajra families.  The mudrā descriptions are terse and some finger positions are ambiguous in the Tibetan; I followed the plain reading. The line "rgyal po gnod mdzes" is rendered as Handsome Destroyer of Harm, a name of a vidyā king, in a tentative translation. "Pledge-mudrā" renders dam tshig phyag rgya. The text ends mid-sentence, so the final line is rendered as the opening of a continuing clause.  The text breaks off mid-sentence, as the passage ends. The reading "root enclosure" for ར་བའི་རི་མོ is tentative; it likely means the outer boundary line of the maṇḍala drawing. The statement that the disciple recites the mantra "in both maṇḍalas" (དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གཉིས་པོར) follows the Tibetan literally, and the doctrinal referent of the two maṇḍalas is not specified here.  The wording of the first lines ("never in vain," "rite of the threads") and the phrase "the second and third" in the passage about someone who has gone beyond are compressed in the Tibetan, and my reading is tentative. "Yam wood" for ཡམ་ཤིང་ is uncertain; it may refer to a particular sacrificial wood. "Perfection of wisdom" in the center is the Tibetan's own wording for the central deity of the maṇḍala.  Several plant and substance names are transliterated from Sanskrit in the Tibetan and are rendered here by their probable Sanskrit identities: dugūla (a fine cloth), cūta (mango), udumbara and aśvattha (kinds of fig), palāśa, bilva, kodrava, and ariṣṭa. Some are only approximate. The line on "yak tail" fans translates a Tibetan word that may be a yak-tail whisk. The line about facing west for a disciple "endowed with every good quality" is as the Tibetan reads; the orientations for the other rites follow the earlier passage. The word rendered "poison" is uncertain.  The first line lacks a clear grammatical subject in the verse and is read as the offering formula spoken by the person presenting the disciple. The line "bestow upon the disciple ... Ālaya" is not present; the word rendered "yama wood" (ཡམ་སྲེག་ཤིང) is obscure and may refer to a particular sacrificial wood. "Torma" is retained as a ritual offering term. The phrase about people "who travel on foot" is a literal rendering of a formulaic list of what one possesses.  The final line is a fragment and the sense of its continuation is unavailable here; it may begin a new instruction about suitable companions. The word "ན་དབུ་ཅན" is rendered "headstrong" as a tentative reading; it may instead mean "sick in the head" or refer to a specific condition. "ཏྭ་རིམ" is taken as "ritual of it." "ས་འོག་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར" is rendered "subterranean maṇḍala" in the sense of one made on or beneath the ground.  This passage is dense and the verse is at times elliptical, so several lines are rendered conservatively. In the opening lines, the sense of introducing a latecomer alone after the maṇḍala is already drawn is my best reading. The reference to the measures of secret mantra with vases follows the apparent sense of the text, which allows additions to the vase rites without fault. The doctrinal point of the passage, that supplementary rites from other sources may be added but need not all be applied, is preserved as stated.  The passage seems to belong to the Subāhuparipṛcchā-tantra or a similar kriyā-tantra. In the first section, the four are probably the four empowerments, the first for the master's rank, the second for accomplishing mantras, the third for pacifying obstructors, and the fourth for prosperity, but the Tibetan is terse. The "fourth class of people" (bzhi pa'i mi rnams) may refer to this fourth category of empowerment recipients. In "Wandering in saṃsāra," the Tibetan line is repetitive; I have rendered it simply. The last lines are cut off at the end of the passage, so the sentence about two, three, or four is incomplete in sense.  The line "ངུ་འབོད་སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བར་འགྲོ" is rendered as going to the hell of Wailing, taking ངུ་འབོད as the name of the Wailing hell (Raurava), though it could also be read as "wailing, the being goes to hell." In the phrase "the dhāraṇī that confuses with fire," the reading of མེས་རྨོངས་བྱེད་པ is uncertain, and the underlying Sanskrit is not secure. The line "should with firm diligence generate one and accomplish" is cryptic, and the object of "one" is not stated in the Tibetan. In the passage on spirits, "murderers" renders གཤེད་བྱེད, and the phrase "risen corpses" renders རོ་ལངས (vetāḍa).

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
