The Glorious Secret Essence, the Definitive Ascertainment of Reality (Śrī Guhyagarbha Tattvaviniścaya)

The Glorious Secret Essence, the Definitive Ascertainment of Reality (Sanskrit: Śrī Guhyagarbha Tattvaviniścaya; Tibetan: Dpal gsang ba'i snying po de kho na nyid rnam par nges pa) is a tantra, a scripture of Buddhist esoteric teaching, opening with homage to the Blessed One, glorious Samantabhadra. It is set in Akaniṣṭha, the pure realm where the Tathāgata, the Great Enjoyment, who is of one nature with the body, speech, and mind of all buddhas and with all beings, is shown abiding in a celestial palace of radiant wisdom, and it goes on to present the ultimate nature of reality as the basis of tantric practice. The text is Toh 832 in the Kangyur, the canonical collection of Buddhist scriptures translated into Tibetan, where it belongs to the Tantra division. It is the central root tantra of the Nyingma tradition's Mahāyoga teachings, which is why it is widely known simply as the Guhyagarbha Tantra.

In the language of India: Śrī Guhyagarbha Tattvaviniścaya. In the language of Tibet: The Glorious Secret Essence, the Definitive Ascertainment of Reality.

Homage to the Blessed One, glorious Samantabhadra.

At the time this was spoken: the Tathāgata, the perfectly complete Buddha, the Blessed One, the Great Enjoyment, who is the very nature of the body, speech, and mind vajra of all the tathāgatas of the ten directions and four times, and who is, without exception and without remainder, of a single nature with all beings, neither separate from them nor different, indivisible from them, abided in Akaniṣṭha. That place has neither edge nor center. Its ground is the immeasurable radiant wheel of wisdom, and upon it stands a celestial palace blazing with precious wisdom. It is unbroken throughout the ten directions. Because it has grown with limitless qualities, it is square. It is adorned with projecting ornaments of surpassing precious wisdom. At its summit, the wisdom of all the maṇḍalas of the buddhas of the ten directions and four times, without exception, is gathered together, not separate but one in essence. It is differentiated into distinct varieties and special features, immeasurable in number, in the shapes and colors and so forth of inconceivable wisdom jewels. It is richly draped with garlands of many kinds of precious wisdom, with hanging tassels and fringes, and with adornments, inconceivable and spontaneously arisen, unobstructed and luminous, of many kinds of forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and tactile sensations, thronging the ten directions. It has doorways through which one enters by way of the four gates of liberation, and it possesses the stairways of the eight liberations. It has no outside and no inside, and since everything has become inner, within it there are seats of fearless lions, seats of powerful elephants, seats of miraculous horses, seats of sovereign peacocks, and seats of unobstructed garuḍas of the sky. Upon discs of sun and moon, naturally luminous, and upon unstained precious lotus thrones, the Blessed One abides. His body has no front and no back; his faces are everywhere brilliantly clear, adorned with the major and minor marks, inconceivable. In all directions the diverse forms of body, speech, and mind appear. His two feet, method and wisdom, are level, and he sits in the vajra posture of the committed observance. His six hands bear blazing seals of precious wisdom. He has three heads, those of body, speech, and mind, inconceivable.

With him are the Blessed Tathāgata, the King of Consciousness, the Tathāgata, the King of Form, the Tathāgata, the King of Feeling, the Tathāgata, the King of Perception, and the Tathāgata, the King of Formations. All of them shine in the colors of dark blue, white, yellow, red, and green. There are also the supreme consorts, the Space of Appearance, the Space of Solidity, the Space of Softness, the Space of Warmth, the Space of Movement, and the other assemblies of consorts. Not two apart from them, he pervades the dharmadhātu, boundless in every direction. He abides pervading everywhere, just as a sesame seed is full of oil in every part.

Then there were the Great Awakening Vajra Seeing, the Great Awakening Vajra Hearing, the Great Awakening Vajra Smelling, and the Great Awakening Vajra Tasting. There were the assemblies of consorts: the one to be seen, the one to be heard, the one to be smelled, and the one to be tasted. There were the Great Awakening Vajra Seer, the Great Awakening Vajra Hearer, the Great Awakening Vajra Smeller, and the Great Awakening Vajra Taster. There were the consorts of the past, the present, the arising, and the not yet come. There were the Great Destroyer of Touching, the Great Destroyer who touches, and the Great Destroyer, the touched.

There was the Great Destroyer, Touch-Consciousness. The consort was neither permanent, nor annihilated, nor a self, nor a sign. In such a gathering of expressions, beyond all that speech can raise up, they abided in non-duality.

Then the Tathāgatas, the assemblies of consorts, and the non-dual secret maṇḍalas drew forth this very secret of body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity from the vajra.

E E E MA O!

Suchness itself is the sovereign of the basic space.
The maṇḍala of wisdom rests in the expanse of compassion.
One's own appearing is itself samādhi.
Reflections and illusions are utterly pure.

This is clarity itself. Body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity are without obstruction. It is the very place of the supreme vajra, the wheel of ornaments, endowed with the inexhaustible wish-fulfilling jewel of qualities. So it is said in the vajra secret words.

This is the first chapter, the introduction, from The Heart of Secrets, the Ascertainment of Reality.

Then the Blessed One, the Vajra Mind Samantabhadra, the Doer, entered into the consort, the Vajra Lady, the Female Doer, Dharma Samantabhadrī, in the manner of the nature of all things without remainder. Through his entering, all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions and four times, without remainder, became indivisible in the nature of one. And so the Tathāgata himself spoke this inspired utterance to the Tathāgata himself.

E MA O!

The vajra aggregates and limbs
are known as the five perfect buddhas.
The sense sources and elements, all the many,
are none other than the maṇḍala of the bodhisattvas.
Earth and water are Locanā and Māmakī.
Fire and wind are White-Robed Pāṇḍarā and Tārā.
Space is the Lady, sovereign of the expanse.
The three realms of existence are buddha fields from the beginning.
All phenomena, without remainder, every one,
are nothing other than buddhahood.
No phenomenon other than buddhahood itself
is ever attained by buddhahood itself.

When this was spoken, all the Tathāgatas were delighted.

Then the consort, the Female Doer, Dharma Samantabhadrī, having become non-dual with the Blessed One Vajra Mind Samantabhadra, spoke this inspired utterance.

KYE MA!

The empty expanse of the ten directions is secluded from the beginning.
The three realms of existence are themselves the pure field.
The five degenerations are themselves the abode of bliss.
The five aggregates are themselves perfect buddhas.
Since all is the supreme essence,
one does not seek the Victors' Dharma elsewhere.
A dharma said to be other than this very nature,
even if sought, is not found by the Victors.

When this was spoken, the Tathāgata himself knew that everything is awakened from the beginning.

Then the great self of non-duality, awakened from the beginning, spoke this arising of the mind as wisdom.

E MA O! Wondrous, marvelous Dharma,
the secret of all perfect buddhas:
from the unborn everything is born,
and even in being born there is no birth.
E MA! Wondrous, marvelous Dharma,
the secret of all perfect buddhas:
from the unceasing everything ceases,
and even in ceasing there is no cessation.
E MA! Wondrous, marvelous Dharma,
the secret of all perfect buddhas:
from the unabiding everything abides,
and even in abiding there is no abiding.
E MA! Wondrous, marvelous Dharma,
the secret of all perfect buddhas:
from the unobserved everything is observed,
and even in observing there is no observing.
E MA! Wondrous, marvelous Dharma,
the secret of all perfect buddhas:
from the without-coming-or-going there is going and coming,
and even in going and coming there is no going or coming.

When this was spoken, all the Tathāgatas and all the assemblies of consorts were pervaded by delight.

Then all the Tathāgatas, together with the assemblies of consorts, spoke this inspired utterance.

E MA O! The Dharma secret from the beginning,
its nature is secret in the diverse appearances.
By its very essence it is utterly secret.

Not otherwise, and utterly secret.

Thus it was declared. Although all the Tathāgatas and all phenomena are indivisible, since all are of one defining mark, being by their very essence buddhas from the beginning, yet beings, through the conceptuality of ignorance, ripen in the six classes of the five destinies in ways beyond thought. Toward this, great compassion and the great wisdom of the buddhas arose, and they uttered this inspired utterance.

E MA! From the essence of the Sugata,
by their own conceptuality and karma, beings emanate
manifold bodies, enjoyments,
abodes, sufferings, and the rest,
and cling to each as self and as what belongs to self.
No one has bound them; they are unbound,
and there is nothing to be bound.
Through conceptual clinging to a self,
one forcefully ties knots in the sky.
Without bondage and without liberation,
the Buddha's Dharma is spontaneously complete from the beginning.
To teach this, the buddhas perform manifold displays.

Thus the Tathāgata himself addressed the Tathāgata himself with this inspired utterance.

This is the second chapter, on generating the awakening mind of ultimate and conventional truth as wisdom, from the Secret Essence, the Definitive Reality.

Then, from all the Tathāgatas, a being of the family, called Blessing of Great Compassion, the six Sages, issued forth from the body, speech, and mind vajra of the Tathāgatas. Having issued forth, by the power of karma, in each of the great thousands of the three-thousandfold world systems of the ten directions, boundless and endless, down to the six worlds of the lower and upper realms, each Sage, each Blessed One, worked for the benefit of the beings of the five destinies through four kinds of taming. They displayed birth, going forth, austerities, awakening, the subduing of Māra, the turning of the wheel of Dharma, the great miraculous display, and passing beyond sorrow, and so on. Knowing the four times everywhere, knowing the mind-streams of all everywhere, seeing everything everywhere with the miraculous eye, hearing everywhere with the miraculous ear, benefiting everywhere through miraculous rites, and, being without defilement, possessing the six great clairvoyances that perfect the conduct of Samantabhadra everywhere, with body inconceivable everywhere, mind inconceivable everywhere, face inconceivable everywhere, and speech inconceivable everywhere, they appeared as inconceivable, countless numbers in the ten directions.

All of them, according to the needs of those to be tamed, through the vehicle of gods and humans, the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, and the unsurpassed vehicle, taught eighty-four thousand teachings as antidotes to the eighty-four thousand afflictions that are the conceptuality of ignorance. They teach, they have taught, and they will teach. All of these culminate in showing outer and inner dependent origination of the apprehended and the apprehender, the clinging, the projection and imputation, the infallibility of karma and its results, and that one is not stained by karma and its results, will not be stained, and there is no staining.

Then all the Tathāgatas spoke this inspired utterance.

However many deluded phenomena the world holds,
through the apprehended and apprehender of ignorant conceptuality
revolve in the two of outer and inner dependent connection,
and come to experience discordant pleasure and pain.
Yet from their intrinsic nature nothing has fallen away.
In the two modes of true illusion,
there is no self and no other than self;
the utterly pure expanse is of one mode.
Self and other than self
are nothing but mistaken conceptualization;
nothing subtle or profound exists.
One engages in mistaken thought itself.

Apart from this, nothing moves at all.
Even the unbroken stream of mistaken thought, of cause and effect,
is the momentary expanse without any foundation or root.
The nature of the utterly pure expanse itself
is engaged in through mastery over that very nature.
Self, other than self, and the stream of conceptual thought
are the supreme, utterly pure, unsurpassed vehicle.
Through four vehicles one departs toward definite emergence,
yet through one vehicle one abides in the result.
If, with right realization, one examines thoroughly,
then from what has no intrinsic nature, anything at all may be accomplished.
The buddhas never pass into nirvāṇa,
and the Dharma too will never vanish.
In order to ripen the ignorant and to tame them,
they appear and then demonstrate passing beyond sorrow.
Vinaya, sūtras, Abhidharma,
the commitments, the means of accomplishment, and the accomplished,
the tantras of body, speech, and mind,
renowned throughout the ten directions,
all unfold from the Secret Heart.
This Secret Heart of intrinsic nature
firmly settles the source
of all the collections of scripture and all the tantras.
Phenomena are mere designation by name.
The Teacher, in accord with the meaning,
designated them with names and words and so taught.
What is not taught has no real thing in its words.

Thus they spoke this inspired utterance.

Then this very secret of those nondual maṇḍalas of the Tathāgatas was brought forth from the vajra of body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity.

Ah ho!
The root of existence, its faults and its fixations, springs from conceiving a self.
The six classes, their birth and ceasing, bodies, enjoyments,
dwelling places, suffering, the wheel of delusion, and the rest,
apart from mistaken thought, nothing else moves at all.
Emptiness, selflessness, primordial knowing, the self-aware mind,
mastered through mindfulness, without observed object or observer.
Wondrous body, speech, mind, qualities, activity, and buddha fields:
nothing exists apart from these. That itself is just so.

Having thus spoken in the vajra words of the secret, the Tathāgatas themselves knew that the countless emanations of the six sages, and everything spoken by all the Tathāgatas, are gathered into these.

This is the third chapter, "Settling All Phenomena from the Definitive Establishment of the Reality of the Secret Heart."

Then all the Tathāgatas, being of one intention, in the mode of great equality, within the vajra expanse, without moving from the meditative absorption in which all phenomena are primordially buddha, brought forth, from the vajra of body, speech, and mind, what is called the Wheel of the Garland of Letters, in which all phenomena abide as mere names.

A, becoming utterly stable, from the white A
the most subtle A's radiate forth.
Having become vividly present, filling the ten directions,
they are shown to neither increase nor diminish even when gathered in.
From these, all the blazing clarity of the collections of names
radiates and gathers in just so.
This is the cause of stable, arisen primordial wisdom,
the vajra accomplishment.

A, Ā. Ka, Kha, Ga, Gha, Ṅa. Ca, Cha, Ja, Jha, Ña. Ṭa, Ṭha, Ḍa, Ḍha, Ṇa. Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na. Pa, Pha, Ba, Bha, Ma. Ya, Va, Ra, La. Śa, Ṣa, Sa, Ha. Kṣa. I, Ī. U, Ū. E, Ai. O, Au.

When these were brought forth, the limitless ten directions of the six world systems shook in six ways, shook greatly, and shook completely in every way, and all phenomena became merely the defining mark of names.

Ho!

Then all the Tathāgatas spoke this inspired utterance.

The letter A is not found even in the Middle Way
of emptiness and non-emptiness.
All is mere name; all the buddhas
abide in this very garland of letters.
From A itself, appearing in manifold forms,
the forty-two letters beginning with Ka
gather all within the names of sound.
It is certain that this itself is the king of complete realization.
Ema! Wondrous! The names of the forty-five
great miraculous displays
are the place that holds all words without remainder,
speaking and teaching manifold great meanings.
The nature of the letters is mind without real things;
though selfless, free of extremes, and unobservable,
through the collections of names, shapes, and colors,
it playfully emanates and shows whatever appears.

The wisdom beings who have gone to the ten directions and the four times,
their body, speech, and mind,
the forty-five maṇḍalas themselves,
are complete from the head of the letter A through to Kṣaḥ.
The nature of mind is the letter,
yet the letter is no real thing.
That very unobservable, in its manifold display,
is the great wheel of body, speech, and mind.
Body, speech, and mind are the wondrous,
the summoning of the great wondrous miraculous displays.
Space is drawn upon by space itself;
therefore it is called a "letter."

The head stroke is the unerring path.
The dot is called by the name of wisdom.
The vertical stroke cuts the verse with great skillful means.
A is the unborn suchness.
Ā is the emptiness of beginning and end.

Tha is the vajra of illusion itself.
Ṭa is the very illusion of appearance.
Ḍa is the wish-fulfilling illusion.
Ḍha is the illusion whose nature is appearing.
Ṇa is illusion in every respect.
Tha is full realization through the net.
Ta is stability through the net.
Da is clarity through the net.
Dha is entwining through the net.
Na is all-transforming through the net.

Ka is the supreme mind of the eye.
Kha is the supreme mind of the ear.
Ga is the supreme mind of the nose.
Gha is the supreme mind of the tongue.
Ṅa is that which destroys even mind.

Ca is the supreme body of the eye.
Cha is the supreme body of the ear.
Ja is the supreme body of the nose.
Jha is the supreme body of the tongue.
Ña is that which destroys even body.

Pa is the supreme speech of the eye.
Pha is the supreme speech of the ear.
Ba is the supreme speech of the nose.
Bha is the supreme speech of the tongue.
Ma is that which destroys even speech.

Ya is utterly pure arising.
Va is pure abiding.
Ra is pure ceasing.
La is pure emptiness.
Śa is the absence of permanence.
Ṣa is that there is not even annihilation.
Sa is free of extremes, selfless.
Ha is signlessness itself.
Kṣa is the mind of the mind of wisdom.

I is among gods, as many as there are atoms.
Ī is among asuras, as many as there are atoms.
U is among humans, as many as there are atoms.
Ū is among animals, as many as there are atoms.
E is among hungry ghosts, as many as there are atoms.
Ai is among hell-beings, as many as there are atoms.
Oṃ destroys everything.
Au is the dissolution of everything.

This great gathering, the wheel of letters,
is gathered into the garland of body, speech, and mind.
Thus it was spoken. Aho!

Then the Tathāgatas, together with the assemblies of consorts and those very non-dual maṇḍalas, drew forth this secret from the vajra of body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity. Aho!

Method and wisdom, a cloud of delight, the gathered awakening minds, the wheel of cause;
the result, the Victors' ripened accomplishment, the wondrous forty-two collected names.
The unconditioned itself is the pledge that brings forth the conditioned vajra maṇḍala.
It is the great power of the gathering of causes and conditions, without witness, which does not transgress. Hoḥ!
These are words of the vajra secret.

When this was spoken, all the Tathāgatas became a wheel of letters.

This is the fourth chapter, "The Arrangement of the Wheel of the Garland of Letters," from the Heart of Secrets, the Definitive Ascertainment of Suchness.

Then, from the cloud arrangement of the wheel of letters, this unfolding of illusion was spoken deliberately.

Mind without root
is the root of all phenomena.
Mind itself is the nature of the letters;
the letters are a cloud of wish-fulfilling jewels.
The forty-two maṇḍalas of illusion,
through the full realization of the net maṇḍala,
bring about the accomplishment of all maṇḍalas
complete in the ten directions and four times.

It turns into nectar and arises;
it clears the four hundred and four diseases;
it brings forth enjoyments and purifies the lower realms;
whatever is wished, its transformation into something else is accomplished.
From space a hard vajra arises;
blazing, it even burns fire;
likewise it turns into falling water.
It casts away this world system,
and everything becomes empty and falls.

Summoning and sending forth, binding and freeing,
nourishing and slaying, defeating and conquering:
all of this comes to be accomplished through this samādhi.

That very wisdom, appearing of itself,
as names, words, forms, and the rest, wish-fulfilling,
arises like the appearance of light within darkness.
By transformation it is like the way a medicine turns iron to gold.

One who honors the Teacher with devotion, whose realization is clear,
who knows without loss the pledges, mantras, and mudrās,
and who possesses the requisite articles, will accomplish.
Without these, there is no success, and one is ruined.

The essence of the supreme accomplishment,
what the Victors of the three times have taken to heart,
is a wish-fulfilling treasury that is never exhausted,
arising without increase or decrease.
From the absence of things, a cloud of things arises,
appearing and changing in manifold ways.
Within things themselves there is no thing at all;
this is the samādhi that commands the power of thought.

Whoever does not know the objectless
does not know the dharmadhātu.
Therefore, with fear of things and of non-things,
come to know the objectless.

Mind itself, which has no foundation or root,
is not male, not female, not neuter,
not without marks, nor of any lineage;
it is not a color, not a shape,
not a place, not anything at all.
It is suchness, the dharmadhātu, wisdom.
Through skillful means it is the cause of all mudrās.
From means, means arise, and the means are inconceivable.
Within what has no distinction, there appear distinctions:
the inner, the inner of the inner, and the outer.
The maṇḍala is inconceivable, the play of wisdom.
This is the fearless Samantabhadra, the supreme mudrā.

By whomever the mind, like a maddened elephant,
is tamed through settling in meditative equipoise,
if mantras and mudrās are then rightly taught,
accomplishment becomes a great wonder.

Thus he spoke, and the Tathāgata, gazing upon him, was pleased.

This is the fifth chapter, on accomplishing illusion, from the Definitive Reality of the Secret Essence.

Then all the Tathāgatas, the great beings whose nature is neither one nor many, desired that their own great maṇḍala should appear in all ten directions of the six world systems, and so they uttered this inspired utterance.

The four directions and the center of wisdom are set out;
the maṇḍala is inconceivable and spontaneously accomplished.
The yogī who realizes the Great Perfection
engages the great maṇḍala from which all arises.

A wheel with four spokes and a rim,
adorned with four corners, with a spacious interval,
and everywhere four-sided, with gateway enclosures,
shining with manifold play like banks of cloud,
is adorned with forty-two maṇḍalas.

Upon great thrones of lions, elephants, horses, and garuḍas,
and of sky-soaring beings,
on seats of sun, moon, lotus, and jewel,
dwell the complete buddhas in the manner of bodhisattvas.
The wheel king is with his queen.
On the right are the seer, the hearer, the smeller,
and the taster, with their assemblies of consorts.
At the corners are the one who causes seeing,
the one who causes hearing, the one who causes smelling,
and the one who causes tasting,
and they dwell together with their assemblies of consorts.
In the spacious interval are the six sages.
In front and behind, the doers
and the deeds are taught to abide.
At the four gateway enclosures are the subduers,
dwelling together with their assemblies of consorts.

They hold vajra, wheel, jewel,
lotus, sword, blazing bell,
utpala, wish-fulfilling tree, and other emblems,
bearing implements of beauty and delight.
They are dark blue, white, yellow, green,
and of many other hues,
with soft, supple, slender, and youthful forms,
brilliant, radiant, dense, and blazing with majesty.
Great masses of light rays stream forth,
crowded with garlands of flame,
pervading without edge or center:
the maṇḍala is inconceivable and spontaneously accomplished.

The great supreme mudrā of the body,
though never stirring from suchness, the dharmadhātu,
displays the form body of perfect liberation,
and, in order to tame all beings without exception,
shows manifold bodies in accord with them.
That showing is itself like illusion or a mirage,
and that very nature never stirs from the dharmadhātu.
Without stirring, it yet appears in manifold ways.

At that time, in the manifold ways that beings differ,
each one perceives it in its own fashion.
Though suchness itself is never altered,
by the force of the unfolding of karma it appears to each one differently,
like the reflection in a mirror, or the moon in water.

At that time, to all beings of the six realms
he shows a form that turns them away from wrongdoing.
To novices he shows the form of an arhat;
to solitary buddhas he shows the form of a rhinoceros-like solitary one.
And so too, for the supreme vehicles, in due order,
in Akaniṣṭha, the supreme unsurpassed abode,
the body appears in the manner of Vairocana.

To the retinues of bodhisattvas,
the supreme speech does not speak, just as it is in suchness;
rather, by the body he shows them the Dharma directly.
As in the manner of showing a mirror,
all true blemishes are cleared away.
When the retinue gazes upon the body of the Tathāgata,
the obscurations to awakening, fathomlessly deep,
appear in that body as in a mirror.

From there they purify the ten grounds step by step,
and rightly attain unsurpassed awakening.
The dharmakāya is measureless and inexpressible;
the enjoyment is an inexhaustible treasury of jewels;
the emanations, in the millions, are beyond thought.
All the major and minor marks are complete.
In every field of activity there is a maṇḍala,
and the two great accumulations are also perfected and played with in joy.
Skillful means and wisdom are the supreme ground,
and so on, the supreme inconceivable qualities.
The body is the unchanging svastika body, beyond birth and death,
abiding in the field of all the afflictions,
becoming a treasury of the inexhaustible.
The vajra-holder is the body of awareness;
all are the body of undivided equality;
all is the body of omniscient wisdom.
At that time all five bodies are fully complete.

Having spoken thus, throughout the boundless, endless ten directions of all the six world systems, a single maṇḍala, beyond expression, and as numerous as the dust motes of a buddha field, became clearly manifest.

Then the Tathāgatas, together with their assemblies of consorts, drew forth from the vajra of body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity the very secret of those maṇḍalas, which are nondual.

Ah ho!
Beyond object and apprehender, immeasurable, inconceivable,
the self-aware wisdom, the manifold maṇḍalas, are beyond expression.
Equal and unequal, all-pervading, the pervader and the unpervaded, the expanse:
from the beginning, the maṇḍala, utterly luminous in all, unfolds without elaboration.
Ho!

This is in the vajra words of the secret.

This is the sixth chapter, the Elaboration of the Maṇḍala, from the Secret Essence, the Definitive Reality.

Then all the Tathāgatas, together with their assemblies of consorts, drew forth this from the vajra of body, speech, and mind.

Bhrūṃ viśvaviśuddhe. Hūṃ vajradhṛk. Oṃ jinajik. Svāṃ ratnadhṛk. Āṃ ārolik. Hrīṃ prajñādhṛk. Māṃ dhātvīśvarī. Lvaṃ dveṣarati. Māṃ moharati. Pāṃ rāgarati. Tāṃ vajrarati. Kṣīṃ hirājaya. Trāṃ āgarbhaya. Hrīṃ hahūṃ. Padma vadam. Jīṃ kuru pāṇi hrīḥ. Hūṃ lāsye samayastvaṃ. Trāṃ mālye samaya hoḥ. Hrī gītirāgo 'haṃ. Āṃ nṛtyarāgaya me. Maidharaṇe svāhā. Thlhīṃ nissaraṃ bhāya svāhā. Hūṃ sarājaya svāhā. Muṃ śrī aṃ rāgāya svāhā. Jeḥ dhūpa pravisa. Hūṃ puṣpa avisa. Vaṃ dīpa vasukhīni. Hoḥ gandhacittaṃ. Hūṃ yamāntakṛta phaṭ. Hūṃ padmāntakṛta phaṭ. Hūṃ prajñāntakṛta phaṭ. Hūṃ vighnāntakṛta phaṭ. Oṃ mahāvajradharaṃ mahākrodheśvarī jvalanī hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ mahāratnadharaṃ mahākrodheśvarī jvalanī hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ mahāpadmadharaṃ mahākrodheśvarī jvalanī hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ mahākarmadharaṃ mahākrodheśvarī jvalanī hūṃ phaṭ. Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ vajracitta oṃ a a a vajrabhadra samanta āḥ. Oṃ mune hrīṃ svāhā. Oṃ mune hūṃ svāhā. Oṃ mune sruṃ svāhā. Oṃ mune groṃ svāhā. Oṃ mune kṣaṃ svāhā. Oṃ mune ya svāhā. Oṃ ehyehi bhagavān mahākāruṇika dṛśya hoḥ. Samayastvaṃ. Jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ. Oṃ āṃ ḥ hūṃ svāhā.

Ba ba ba ba. Ba ba ba ba ba. Ja ja ja ja ja. Pa pa pa pa pa. Sa sa sa sa sa. Pa pa pa pa pa. Ma ma ma ma ma. Pa pa pa pa pa. Ya ya ya ya ya. Pa pa pa pa pa. Oṃ āḥ hūṃ svāhā.

The King of Wisdom, whose body, speech, and mind
Possess marvelous and wondrous qualities and activities,
In that very state of union,
Let me be joined to the Great Seal.
Oṃ vajra samaya hūṃ.
Oṃ vajra samaya stvaṃ.
Oṃ vajra samaya hoḥ.
Jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ.

As this was spoken, these maṇḍalas of speech resounded throughout all the ten directions of the six worlds. They resounded, they resounded abundantly, they resounded everywhere. Then the Blessed One caused the Doer, the vajra, and the Deed, the fire vajra, to dissolve into the nondual maṇḍala. Then the Great Self of all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions and four times brought forth, from the net of vajra magical display of body, speech, and mind, this teaching called The Gathering and Blessing of the Wisdom of the Great Self.

Oṃ mahā-śūnyatā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ mahā-ādarśa-jñāna-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ mahā-pratyavekṣaṇā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ mahā-samatā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ mahā-kṛtyānuṣṭhāna-jñāna-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahākāya-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahāvāk-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahācitta-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahānurāga-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.
Oṃ sarva-tathāgata-mahāpūjā-vajra-svabhāva-ātmako 'ham.

As this was spoken, they dissolved, became clear, and blazed with light.

Emaho! A wondrous and marvelous Dharma:
The speech of all the perfect buddhas
Transcends all sound, name, and word,
Yet diverse sounds arise distinctly.
The single maṇḍala and its limbs of speech
Are inconceivable and pervade everything.
Sounds, names, and words each resound separately,
And all are the supreme seal of speech.
From the supreme tantra, the net of magical display,
Even the meaning of the speech of the blissful one
Arises, and when all of it turns into the nature of the lotus,
The sounds of liberation, the path, and saṃsāra,
However they are spoken, are the supreme speech.
All the languages of the higher and lower vehicles
And of every kind of wrong path
Are gathered into the vajra speech of awakening,
And in being gathered, resound throughout the ten directions.
Resounding itself is spoken in an unattached state;
In the very act of speaking, there is nothing to be said.
That unsayable itself is the diverse sounds,
Heard by all and distinguished by each.
Just as a single utterance in its own manner,
By one sound of speech, is understood by all,
This is the king of supreme speech.
All the higher and lower vehicles as well
Are taught from nothing other than suchness,
Yet are heard separately as means of taming beings.
However the scriptures are all expressed,
Nothing is taught that is other than suchness.
Though the speech of awareness, without letters,
Is not brought forth at the tip of the tongue,
By the blessing of compassionate speech
The diverse benefits for beings are made clear, each in turn.
This clarity itself is the supreme vajra of speech.
The benefits for beings accomplished by such speech
Do not stir from the state of suchness,
Just like the sound of an echo.

This is the seventh chapter, the Gathering of the Maṇḍala and the Chapter on Secret Mantra, from the Ascertainment of Suchness, the Heart of the Secret.

Then all the Tathāgatas spoke this out of their own intent, called The Blessing That Spontaneously Establishes All the Limbs in the Maṇḍala:

Fully manifested by the net of magical display,
The supreme seal of all awakening,
The heart that is the ascertainment of that very secret,
The seal, is hard to cross beyond.
The letter in the sun-disk of Akṣobhya...

From the precious moon-disk, the letters, five and two, are placed together as a pair. Their joining is the cause from which the mudrā arises. Oṃ and Mūṃ are joined at their tips, and eight syllables are twisted together, their tips intertwined. This is the seal that bestows great bliss, uniting in equality with all the Victors.

Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Hūṃ, and at its tip a vajra blazes. A moon-disk, a hidden syllable, the vajra-bell resounding, and by way of entwining, one remains firm in the Dharma. Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Mūṃ, and at its tip the vajra-bell blazes. The sun's five syllables are entwined within the activity. Bowing, one gazes with a smiling radiance.

Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Oṃ, and at its tip a wheel blazes. A moon-disk, a hidden syllable, the bell resounding, and by way of entwining, one remains firm in the Dharma. Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Lāṃ, and at its tip the bell blazes. The sun's five syllables are entwined within the activity. Bowing, one gazes with a smiling radiance.

Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Svā, and at its tip a jewel blazes. A moon-disk, a hidden syllable, the bell resounding, and by way of entwining, one remains firm in the Dharma. Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Māṃ, and at its tip the bell blazes. The sun's five syllables are entwined within the activity. Bowing, one gazes with a smiling radiance.

Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Āṃ, and at its tip a lotus blazes. A moon-disk, a hidden syllable, the bell resounding, and by way of entwining, one remains firm in the Dharma. Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Phyvaṃ, and at its tip the bell blazes. The sun's five syllables are entwined within the activity. Bowing, one gazes with a smiling radiance.

Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Hā, and at its tip a sword blazes. A moon-disk, a hidden syllable, the bell resounding, and by way of entwining, one remains firm in the Dharma. Conceal four syllables and set them at the heart. Raise up Rtāṃ, and at its tip the bell blazes. The sun's five syllables are entwined within the activity. Bowing, one gazes with a smiling radiance.

The emblems are the blue lotus, the nāga tree, and the rest: a jewel, a sprout, a blazing sword, a white lotus, a blazing vajra, the wheel of Dharma, a jewel. There is a beautiful form, a jeweled garland, a lute, and the supreme dancer himself, a garland of flowers, supreme incense, the anointing with lamps, and so on. One is entwined in these activities and remains firm in the Dharma.

The manner of prostrating with heads lowered is like the great mudrā above. All is entwined in the state of the nondual expanse.

The mudrās of the wrathful ones at the four gates are these: one raises a human head, one presses down with a vajra, one presses down with a great skull-serpent, and one presses down with the vajra net and its activity. They hold the iron hook, the noose, the chain, and the bell, Sphoṭa, Hoḥ. Those who dwell at the four gates likewise have the manner of bowing and entwining as above.

The mudrās of the six sages are various, but in brief they are six mudrās: the begging staff, the lute, the armor, the scripture, the jewel casket, and fire and water, which are well shown. The consort is the nondual expanse of phenomena. Samantabhadra, in meditative equipoise, radiates primordial wisdom, and as the consort he becomes the perfect equality, the maṇḍala of the lotus.

Furthermore the mudrās are various: either the Tathāgata himself, or the vajra palms joined themselves. The supreme gathering of the great mudrā, if method and wisdom are united, then all that is unmoving and unstirring abides in the state of the great mudrā.

It possesses forty-two limbs. These same are the limbs, the lord of elaboration, and the forty-two become a triple radiation. Through the supreme chief thus endowed, and likewise through the supreme Victor of Victors, twelve and six blaze in a radiance of light. These and others are beyond conception. In the ten directions and four times, in inconceivable ways, they show the aims of taming each in turn. To all vehicles, high and low, to all that is inverted, and to the whole great gathering of peaceful and wrathful ones, they show everything, each in accord. It is like the dancer himself.

From the body it displays diverse arrays. In brief, all the mudrās cannot be spoken of as "this" or as "one." They radiate out as two and as three. Generating and emanating are likewise the same. In brief, all stirring and movement abide within the state of the great mudrā. Abiding itself is not abiding; it is not a dwelling. Thus the Supreme of Speech has declared.

This is the eighth chapter, "The Elaboration of Mudrās, the Blessing of the Limbs as Maṇḍala," from the Ascertainment of the Reality of the Secret Essence.

Then the Tathāgata, the Great Joy, the Vajra, entered into absorption in the arrayed secret pledges, and uttered this inspired utterance.

The supreme pledge, exceedingly subtle, is in the palm of the great mudrā: the sacred maṇḍala of the mind. Let its measure be four finger-widths. Having gathered together the five grains, the five incenses, the five jewels, the five essences, the five medicines, and the five nectars, let the lines be drawn with awareness. Let it have a hub with spokes, a four-spoked wheel with its rim, four corners, and a square, with an interval and a ring at the gates.

On a sun and moon the size of a fingernail's curve, set a lotus seat the size of a jujube seed. Upon a letter the size of a mustard seed, draw the mudrā the size of a sesame seed. Surround it with various fabrics, adornments, garlands, and drinks of delight. Present abundant offerings of clouds of song, dance, and music. With the consort and the heroines, make offerings according to whatever action is desired.

To the fire that has become the mouth, complete in shape, color, and marks, give the fourfold offerings of the four actions, with gatherings of food, drink, and delight. The wrathful maṇḍala is likewise, being practiced in the same exceedingly subtle way. For the immeasurable ones too, do likewise, only to the extent that awareness can measure.

The great mudrā of offering is this: with clouds of wish-fulfilling mind, filling all the buddha fields of the ten directions, with a base of varied jewels, soft, smooth, and blissful to the touch, beautifully painted and adorned, blazing with a heap of jewels that are the source of all. Lovely ponds, supremely cool and delightful, various jewel palaces, ornaments, groves of wish-fulfilling trees, the sound of songs and verses, banners, victory standards, garments, and parasols, necklaces, armlets, and bracelets, the finest food and drink, and gods and goddesses, numerous as dust motes, adorned in beauty, with dances and inconceivable offerings besides, filling the whole expanse of space in the ten directions, one offers extensively to all the maṇḍalas.

With the distinctive clarity of the fortunate, gradually or else all at once, one meditates on the great mudrā of offering, united evenly with the dharmadhātu. Then, with luminous clarity or with blessing, in the manner of the three-thousandfold world entering a mustard seed, from the expanse one invites the maṇḍala, and offers.

Pleased, they grant the supreme accomplished pledge. By offering to the great self, all the buddha maṇḍalas are pleased. Great joy will pervade all beings of the three existences. Through the firm net of magical illusion, the buddha maṇḍalas without exception that have gone to the ten directions and four times, and the beings of the three realms, become manifest.

Body, speech, mind, and all phenomena abide nowhere and are not to be apprehended. By applying them like a conjuror's illusion, one meditates on space within space. Then, with awareness, one engages the lord of all that is made, and afterwards one should introduce the disciple.

Then that supreme son of good lineage offers his kingdom, his own body, his sons, wife, and wealth, the dearest and most pleasing things. If one makes offerings with the five enjoyments of sovereignty, all the maṇḍalas are thereby honored. Why even speak of the nearby maṇḍala?

All faults become purified. Having carefully examined the disciple's faith, diligence, and discipline, one should confer, in due order, the empowerment of benefit and the empowerment of capacity. With compassion, one should receive the disciple, not letting him go to waste.

Or else, with palms pressed firmly together, for the sake of reaching the great mudrā, one should make the maṇḍala a finger-span in measure. The skilled one should do so according to the rite.

Or else, upon ground that is perfectly level, one should make the maṇḍala a cubit in size. Or else the size of a body, or else three body-lengths. With pegs, cords, colored powders, fine garments and ornaments, and delightful companions, with the drawing of the lines and the rite fully complete, let the great and learned one prepare it with care.

Or else make it sixteen cubits, or twenty, or twenty-five. Meditate on the five maṇḍalas of the families, and also depict the forms endowed with body, speech, and mind.

Or else, extending to the distance of a krośa, in the immeasurable expanse of space, meditate on the many varied maṇḍalas of the buddhas. This is symbolized in order to show it to those who are blind and bewildered, who do not see it. One should draw it with twenty-five colors, or with the five colors, and do so in accord with the rite of discipline.

The supreme play of meditative absorption is boundless. Whether through letters, signs, essence mantras, mudrās, or forms endowed with body, speech, and mind, the blessing is wondrous and marvelous. The accomplishment becomes the pledge of all the buddhas. Making the earth and the like into mudrās, one comes to attain the stages of complete liberation. If one is purified by pure wisdom, what need is there to speak of it? It is suchness itself.

The directions and times, the encircling of the maṇḍala, are themselves great. From the maṇḍala of the mind, which does not fixate on anything, one invites all the maṇḍalas. Into the maṇḍala that is the inseparability of one's own appearances, by the union of the defining marks of entering, the maṇḍala of approach, to which beings come from all directions and times, is fully completed.

The supreme pledge that has come near is the wish-fulfilling tree and the wish-granting jewel, and all the sources of what is desired. These are not material things; they are the steadfast merit of one's own mind. The marvelous miracle, so wondrous, has not come from somewhere else. It is wisdom that relies on skillful means, and it has arisen in just such a way. Because the suchness of the expanse of wisdom has become the mudrā of skillful means, wisdom plays with wisdom, and the play of wisdom itself is gathered.

The Victors manifest and protect, and likewise show the blessing. By the splendor of the power to act and to accomplish, the illusion-like vajra becomes supreme and mighty.

When the five rites are complete, the five requisites fully possessed, and the five limbs of mantra completed, one who strives diligently to enter without lapse accomplishes the supreme sovereign of the family in thirty-six days, or in twelve, fourteen, or sixteen. Then, within sixteen days at most, the five bodies are spontaneously complete.

Within that very wisdom drop, the wisdom drop itself appears, inconceivable and boundless, supreme. Pure buddha-fields beyond measure, fully manifest in the ten directions and four times, immeasurable palaces without limit, adornments of wheels and gatherings of play, all the maṇḍalas without exception, countless in number: seeing them, one is pleased, and from the vast discourse the meaning arises. This is the appearing of the wisdom that accords.

Free from one and many, without extreme or center, suchness is not seen even by the buddhas. Self-arisen wisdom appears without any abiding. Its signs of wrong conception are completely purified, and because it is no different from the expanse of wisdom, and because it is linked with great compassion, the six classes of beings appear in all their times and places without exception.

In the maṇḍala of great bliss, if one enters with faith, performing the two postures, or else the five, desired and delightful things become equal. That wisdom of equal fortune comes near when it is sought.

A great wonder is certain to occur. Those who lose faith will fall. Thus it was spoken as an inspired utterance.

This is the ninth chapter, the chapter on the secret pledges of the Vajra Array, from the Secret Essence, the Ascertainment of Suchness.

Then the Blessed One, in great joy, entered into the meditative absorption called King of Generosity, and spoke this inspired utterance.

From the seal of wisdom and means,
the clear stream of the clustered seeds of bliss
is gathered into the lotus along the vajra path.
Dissolve it through the channels, and transform the maṇḍala.

In the celestial palace of the wheel of the listening faculty,
the very essence is the luminous drop.
From the supreme gathering of the seal of the syllable Trāṃ,
the jewel maṇḍala radiates luminous and dissolves.
From the secret, the great secret, the supreme secret,
let all secrets be heard.
After the secret meaning has been examined,
it is to be spoken of in another way.

In the celestial palace of the luminous wheel,
the very essence is the luminous drop.
From the supreme gathering of the garland of letters,
the maṇḍala of the family radiates luminous and dissolves.
Oṃ, great son of the victors of the three times,
the pair of vajras of body, speech, and mind,
in the offering that delights all the victors,
one becomes equal to all the victors.

In the celestial palace of the wheel of the hands,
the very essence is the luminous drop.
From the supreme gathering of the seal of the syllable Hūṃ,
the maṇḍala of action radiates luminous and dissolves.
Oṃ, you are the vajra of action;
accomplish all actions without exception.
All the gatherings of the many messengers
perform what you require.

In the celestial palace of the wheel of the speaking faculty,
the very essence is the luminous drop.
From the supreme gathering of the seal of the syllable Hrīḥ,
the maṇḍala of the assembly radiates luminous and dissolves.
Oṃ, with the unsurpassed nectar of the Dharma,
satisfy the faithful.
For those of superior, middling, and lesser capacity,
the suitable proclamation of the secret is nothing other than this.

In the celestial palace of the wheel of great movement,
the very essence is the luminous drop.
From Hūṃ, Oṃ, Svā, Aṃ, and Hā,
meditate on the five maṇḍalas and the garland of wrathful ones.
Oṃ, great vajra of body, speech, and mind
of all the ten directions and four times,
maker of all maṇḍalas,
you bestow and carry out the giving of all maṇḍalas.

If one has not pleased the master
and has not received the empowerments,
then listening and all such undertakings
will be fruitless and wasted.

If one confers empowerment with the crown, the diadem, and the garland,
the armor, the banner, and the seal,
the parasol, the vase, food and drink,
and the five essences,
then from this time onward, child of the victors,
all lower rebirths are absent,
one has long life, happiness, and perfect abundance,
and becomes lord of the higher realms and of liberation.
Thus it was spoken.

This is the tenth chapter, the chapter on bestowing empowerment, from the Secret Essence, the Ascertainment of Suchness.

Then the Tathāgata, in great joy, entered into the meditative absorption called Transformation, King of the Net of Illusion, and spoke this inspired utterance.

Through the single cause, the way of the syllables,
blessing, and direct perception,
through these four ways of full realization,
everything becomes the great king of manifest completeness.
All the limbs, faculties, and consciousnesses
are to be known as the ripened result, Oṃ.
Meditate on them as the complete maṇḍala,
or else meditate on the wrathful maṇḍala.

Forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and the rest
are to be known as the ripened result, Māṃ.
Meditate on them as the maṇḍala of the consort,
or else meditate on the maṇḍala of the wrathful goddesses.

With clouds of offerings of clothing, ornaments, food and drink,
song and speech, and dance,
if one engages in them with knowledge as Hūṃ,
the maṇḍala of wonders is pleased.

Goddesses, nāga women, women of low birth,
whether distinguished or not distinguished,
approach and close approach,
accomplishment and great accomplishment:
in the lotus maṇḍala of the consort,
bliss emanates as the maṇḍala of mind.
For all the cloud-gatherings of buddhas without exception...

Let the assembly of equal delight be absorbed through the offering of giving.
That maṇḍala of sun and moon of the one to be accomplished
is taken up by the vajra tongue of the maṇḍala.
The ḍākinī Blazing Light, Longevity, and the others
become the lords of wish-fulfilling clouds.

The supreme fields of transformation and the lesser supreme ones
the skilled one places upon the sun and moon.
Meditate on the formations of pride and of the hand.
Purified by becoming Hūṃ,
dissolve into basic space and blaze forth as the seal.
Transformed into the body, splendid with radiating rays of light,
at the crown meditate on the Victorious One.

Wondrous is the means of liberation from the lower realms:
unborn wisdom, suchness itself,
appearing like an illusion, in the manner of a mirage.
Though one performs all acts of union and liberation,
not even a particle of dust stains one.

Understanding the vessel and its contents and their causes to be pure,
with the equipoise of equipoises that is supreme,
the maṇḍala is the field of Samantabhadra, everywhere good.
Having become the two great assemblies of action and conduct,
with its limbs unimpaired and equipped with the requisites,
and knowing the rite to be complete,
through the maṇḍala of the gathered yogins
the benefit of certain excellence is accomplished.

Through the union of five and five,
arrange the deities of the five clusters.
Meditate in the manner of a wheel
on the ten wrathful gods and the ten wrathful goddesses.
Likewise the Tathāgata family and the vajra family,
and the lotus family, which are body, speech, and mind:
meditate on the deities of the three clusters
together with the host of wrathful ones.
The family of the family, the chief of the family,
the mind of the mind, the supreme mind:
meditate on the deities of the single cluster
together with the host of wrathful ones.

The great hosts of wrathful gods and goddesses,
the messengers, the bearers of seals, and the servants who heed commands,
those who say "What shall we do?" and the other hosts
bring all the accomplishments and activities to completion.

The yogin, the mantra holder who has accomplishment,
abides in the spontaneous state of complete equality,
unobstructed in every kind of conduct;
all is inseparable from the very beginning.

In the vajra family, make everything a maṇḍala;
meditate well on radiating, blazing light.
Let it be absorbed in the manner of non-attachment;
becoming nondual, it is the great seal.
Or else it is body, speech, and mind themselves:
all without exception are body, speech, and mind.
In clear absorption, rays of light radiate,
and dissolve into the state of nondual basic space.
One attains the supreme accomplishment of a vidyādhara,
every maṇḍala is brought to blazing completion,
and afflictions and suffering are dispelled.

The vajra family is the place of birth.
True accomplishment of the mantra holder
comes through all skillful means and wisdom.
Meditate on the five maṇḍalas and the garland of wrathful ones.
In the manner of non-attachment,
radiate many kinds of light,
and let them be absorbed as nondual.
The essence of supreme accomplishment is achieved.

The yogin, through skillful means and wisdom,
meditates on the Tathāgatas and the consorts,
and meditates on the beings as the mind-consorts themselves.
Each one's mantra and seal
and each true absorption shine forth distinctly.
With dwelling and enjoyments as one pleases,
and with an unimpaired and excellent mind,
first act in accord with the pledges one has received.
Without laziness or sloth,
if one practices without doubt,
all the maṇḍalas will be accomplished,
and one gains the supreme and holy vajra secret.
The days and dates of the practice
are explained as stated in the tantra.
These are words of the vajra secret.

Thus the Tathāgata himself spoke, addressing the Tathāgata himself.

This is the eleventh chapter, on the maṇḍala of the assembly, from the Definitive Reality of the Essence of Secrets.

Then the Tathāgata of Great Delight emanated clouds of playful display, entered into the meditative absorption called Arrayed Adornment, and spoke this inspired utterance:

The meditative absorption that stabilizes the maṇḍala,
the fully manifest net of illusion:
through the gathering and radiating of dance and seals,
one comes to travel the path of entry through the sky.
Through the seal of song, words, and sound,
one comes to attain the accomplishment of the Dharma.

Through the seal of ornament and garments,
one accomplishes the blazing king, the Invincible.
Through the seal of food and drink,
one accomplishes the wish-fulfilling body and the nectar.
Through the seal of the vowels and consonants, Āli and Kāli,
all and everything will be accomplished.

The form endowed with the defining marks of wisdom and union,
the cause and conditions that bring about the fruit,
whoever becomes possessed of such power
is renowned as a holder of awareness in the realm of the Victors.
Though one may take up pure births
as a human, a god, or Brahmā,
what is distinctive is that one comes to abide on the grounds.
All the perfections are completed;
skillful means and wisdom, with means supreme,
and wisdom becoming the supreme of the supreme.
The thirteen distinctive grounds,
the distinctions of cause and fruit, are spontaneously perfected.
Meditate on the sun and moon in the pure expanse of the sky's maṇḍala,
and on the king of wisdom, the Tiger-like Hero.
All the boundless maṇḍalas of the Victors
will be meditated upon without remainder.
From none of the four times and ten directions
will a perfect buddha be found.
Mind itself is the perfect buddha;
do not seek for another buddha elsewhere.
Through applying oneself fully to all the maṇḍalas,
all maṇḍalas will be accomplished.
Even if the ritual is excessive or incomplete,
the faults themselves are purified, and there is no error.

Thus he spoke the inspired utterance, and the clouds of playful display were pleased.

This is the twelfth chapter, on the accomplishment of the assembly, from the Definitive Reality of the Essence of Secrets.

Then all the vajra maṇḍalas of the body, speech, and mind of the Tathāgatas of the ten directions and four times gathered into one. Through great delight, they entered into the meditative absorption called the Cloud Array, the utterly secret essence of the pledge, in which all phenomena are spontaneously present from the beginning as the Great Perfection. And they spoke this inspired utterance:

Non-understanding and wrong signs,
partial understanding, and not understanding the truly real:
the meanings of the discipline, the hidden intention,
and the secret of intrinsic nature
are well indicated by the words
that rely on letters, sounds, signs, and collections of names.
The one who draws out the hidden meaning from within
abides in the mind of the Teacher, the Vajra.
With the maṇḍala that possesses the maṇḍala,
one meditates the maṇḍala upon the maṇḍala.
The maṇḍala arisen from the maṇḍala,
the maṇḍala of mind, is the supreme maṇḍala.
The secret drop, the expanse of the maṇḍala,
the source is wisdom, the mother of the family,
the great suchness of the family;
awakening mind is the vajra assembly.
The faculties, objects, times, and awarenesses,
in the maṇḍala of Samantabhadra,
are gazed upon by the great Self, the Supreme,
with the five wisdoms of the mind.
The essence, the drop, in union,
through the play of the wisdom of bliss,
makes offerings to please the wisdoms.
Through undefiled merit,
the wisdom that appears of itself as illusion,
the play, the boundless supreme maṇḍala,
the very expanse of the secret drop:
this is the actual reality of all the buddhas,
the body, speech, qualities, activity, and mind
fully manifest in the ten directions and four times.
It is the supreme, holy mastery
of seeing the faces of all, without remainder, as one's own self.
Abiding in the maṇḍala is the maṇḍala itself;
the perfect maṇḍala is spontaneously accomplished.
As ornament, it embraces all maṇḍalas without remainder.
From the union of the perfect maṇḍala
the maṇḍala of compassion arises entirely.
The maṇḍala of directions and times is the supreme of taming;
by liberating the illusory maṇḍala,
one engages the maṇḍala without doing or doer.
In the maṇḍala of perfected wisdom,
through the union of hearing, reflecting, and meditating,
all that is self-arisen is spontaneously accomplished.
This is the supreme pledge
that all the buddhas never transgress.
Whoever takes delight in this,
by all the maṇḍalas of the buddhas...

In all directions and all times,
those who rely upon the maṇḍalas without remainder
will be regarded as the heart-sons of the Victors.
Through as many aeons as there are atoms in the buddha-fields,
having trained thoroughly and become well established,
the fruit of relying upon the maṇḍalas without remainder
is this great secret.

In the ten directions of the six world-systems,
all the maṇḍalas of the Victors, past and present,
without remainder, once they are attained,
the five bodies are spontaneously perfected.
All that has arisen and all that is yet to come
will be spontaneously accomplished through this.
This is the certain great secret,
the fruit that becomes the path.
For all the maṇḍalas of the Victors without remainder,
there is no definitive meaning more secret than this.
Even if sought, the Victors do not find it.

It is the supreme of all the great seals.
Let it be grasped by those with the eye of discernment,
well trained in hearing, reflecting, and meditating.
To a worthy vessel, firm in good character,
who gives up body and possessions, let it be given.
To others it should never be given.
Should it be given to the deluded, the frivolous,
before the time, their life will be exhausted,
and they will long remain in burning and scorching.

Thus the Tathāgata himself spoke, expressly addressing the Tathāgata himself.

This is the thirteenth chapter, the chapter on the pith instruction, the most secret of all, from the Certainty of Suchness, the Heart of Secrets.

Then all the Tathāgatas themselves sang this song of great joy in the maṇḍala.

Oṃ. The great bindu of the wisdom maṇḍala,
perfect in the ten directions and four times,
the maṇḍala of merit, the assembly of bodies,
the bindu of appearance and emptiness, perfect in all. Hoḥ.

Oṃ. The great bindu of vajra merit,
possessing the vajra wisdom maṇḍala,
the vajra great sound, without limit,
the vajra king, the great bindu. Hoḥ.

Oṃ. The great perfection of body, speech, and mind,
the qualities and activities perfect in all,
primordially and spontaneously perfect, all-good,
the great gathered assembly, the great bindu. Hoḥ.

Oṃ. The realm of equality, illusion-like and without fixation,
from which, without limit, the manifold radiates in all ways,
and without limit, in all ways, spontaneously dissolves,
the great manifold body, speech, and mind. Hoḥ.

Oṃ. In as many world-systems as there are atoms in the ten directions,
the aims of the Victors, as numerous as particles of dust,
through inconceivable emanations as numerous as particles of dust,
are spontaneously accomplished in an instant. Hoḥ.

Oṃ. All without remainder, body, speech, and mind,
the great nature of body, speech, and mind,
pervaded everywhere by body, speech, and mind,
the great bindu of body, speech, and mind. Hoḥ.

Thus it was proclaimed with deliberate intent.

This is the fourteenth chapter, the chapter on pleasing, from the Certainty of Suchness, the Heart of Secrets.

Then the lord of all the Tathāgatas, in the very nature of all the buddhas, manifestly assembled the wrathful maṇḍala. Why was this? There were those who, through conceptions deluded about a self and through clinging to what is imputed, were separated from the true path. They did not realize the concealed secret, and they became arrogantly attached to the hidden secret. Deluded about cause and result, they were hurled by the rough seed of existence and were born in the most intensely hot hell, of uninterrupted torment. Tormented there by the fierce suffering of intense heat, and thinking that even bitter cold would be better, they were scorched even more. Then, tormented by fierce sufferings such as being split open like lotuses, they underwent such sufferings in the eight hells beginning with the intensely hot and the eight beginning with the extremely cold, passing through world-systems for twelve thousand great aeons.

Then, when that karmic maturation was exhausted, they were born for six great aeons as hungry ghosts, tormented by the suffering of hunger and thirst. They met with desired things that were unpleasant, with many kinds of harsh and rough things, and with nothing to enjoy; they became very dry and parched, and their bodies, limbs, and faculties were ill-formed.

Then, when that heavy karmic obscuration had been somewhat thinned out in its ripening, and was joined to a former existence, they were born as hungry ghosts and flesh-eating demons, extremely fierce and wrathful: some with a hundred heads on a single body, some with heads of many kinds, some with a hundred bodies and a single head, some with bodies of many kinds, with many limbs, with limbs of various kinds, wielding cruel weapons of every sort, with an immense retinue, with terrifying forms of many kinds, uttering fearsome cries and sounds of many kinds. By their form, their cries, their smell, and their breath they caused everything to shudder, and with a terrifying black wind and with breaths of cold and heat they threw all the ten directions into turmoil. They afflicted beings with the four hundred and four diseases, and through their power to intoxicate and ruin, they brought under their sway the classes of nāgas, the realms of the asuras, of the gods, and of Brahmā's realm, down from the Luminous gods, the Increasing Virtue gods, and the Great Fruit gods.

Through the power of having relied on him in the past, the Omniscient One saw this, and out of compassion he resolved to subdue them.

Then, in order to display the great majesty that subdues the great pride of the lords of the three existences in the ten directions of the six world-systems, by the net of illusory display, the arrayed vajra of the great Tathāgata, the Blessed One, great glorious one, lord of the vajra body, speech, and mind of all the Tathāgatas, entered into the samādhi called the King of the Net of Illusion, which unfolds the great cloud of the maṇḍala of the Wrathful King. From the realm of suchness he drew forth the great wrathful queen, the Great Sovereign Lady. With the radiance of delight, Hi Hi, he caused the lotus to open, and dissolved into the embrace of blissful nonduality. From the cloud of awakening mind he uttered: Hūṃ Hūṃ Hūṃ Viśva Vajra Krodha Jvala Maṇḍala Phaṭ Phaṭ Phaṭ, Hala Hala Hala Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ. And the boundless ten directions of the six world-systems were pervaded.

From the wrathful maṇḍala there issued assemblies of wrathful ones, three thousand worlds in number, as many as the fine dust particles of the ten directions. The ten directions of the six world-systems shook, shook greatly, shook everywhere. They resounded, resounded greatly, resounded everywhere. They quaked, quaked greatly, quaked everywhere. They shattered, shattered greatly, shattered everywhere. They scattered, scattered greatly, scattered everywhere. And all those dwelling in the thousandfold world-systems of the ten directions of the six world-systems, the Great Sovereign (Maheśvara) and all the rest, mighty in power, mighty in majesty, mighty in strength, fainted, and fainted utterly.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Joyous One himself, became the Great Terrifier, utterly fierce, the one called Shudder, the blazing great blood-drinker, his body dark purple and black, bearing many kinds of weapons as numerous as the dust motes of a thousand world-systems in his heads, hands, and feet. He became three-headed, six-armed, and four-legged, and delighting in the great charnel ground, in the midst of an ocean of blood, upon a mountain of great skeletons like Mount Meru, in the center of a vast blazing wheel, he sat upon the seat of the Great Sovereign, the lord of the charnel ground, the arrogant one, in a posture with limbs outstretched and drawn in.

And the assemblies of the clouds of the wrathful maṇḍala, some of them became the glorious Great Blood-Drinker of the vajra family and dwelt in the east. Some became the glorious Great Blood-Drinker of the jewel family and dwelt in the south. Some became the glorious Great Blood-Drinker of the lotus family and dwelt in the west.

Some became the glorious Great Blood-Drinker of the karma family and dwelt in the north. All of them wore the guise of great terror and let out wrathful roars. In the midst of a blazing expanse, with three heads, six arms, and four legs, they sat upon seats made by trampling gandharvas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, Yama's servants, and others. The great Blood-Drinker consorts, too, each sat embracing the body of her lord.

Then the Heruka of each of the five families was absorbed into one and gathered together, showing the marvel of one subduing many. Next, with fierce minds, beginning with the Great Arrogant One, they displayed a great variety of cruel miraculous powers, and with one voice, in the savage roar of an elephant's rage, they cried out: "Tong, tong! Lord of compassion, will you really act this way?" Taunting thus, they roared, enraged with exceedingly cruel minds.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Joyous One, dwelling with nine heads, eighteen arms, and eight legs, grew intensely wrathful through the skillful means of subduing by compassion, and in a roaring voice he uttered: Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ, ha ha ha, khāhi khāhi khāhi. Thereupon he tore out the hearts and all the sense faculties of that great host of cruel ones, beginning with the Great Lord (Maheśvara), drew out all their entrails, cut off and hacked all their limbs, drank all their blood, and fashioned ornaments from all their bones.

Then he uttered: Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ bhyo e ā ra li jaḥ jaḥ. By this, the world-systems of the ten directions, together with space, were gathered and made to fit within the space of a single mustard seed.

Then the female spirits, the wives of the Great Arrogant One and the others, who is the king of kings over all beings without exception, together with the queen of queens over all female spirits, were gathered: the great rākṣasī, the man-eating rākṣasī, Brahmāṇī, the Agitator, the Sovereign Lady, the Pervader, Kaumārī, the Red One, the Nectar One, the Peaceful One, the Corpse-Lady, the rākṣasī, the Eater, the Joyful One, the Blood-Drinking Intoxicated Corpse, the Solitary Wanderer, the Mind-Stealer, the Accomplished One, the Wind Lady, the Slayer, the Fire Lady, the Sow, the Ager, the Noseless One, the Water Goddess, the Great Black One, the Great Red-Yellow Goat-Head, the Blue-Black Pot-Nose, the Great Yellow-Black Belly-Holder, and others, along with their servants, servants of servants, attendants, attendants of attendants, and retinues as numerous as the dust motes of a buddha-field.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Joyous One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker, through the means of subduing, caused himself to appear again as the great terror deities of the five families. Entering into the meditative absorption called "the Arising of the Retinue Clouds of the Maṇḍala at Play in Joy," he drew forth these from his body, speech, and mind, the vajra actions.

He uttered: Oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra praveśa alala hoḥ. At this, the queens of the female spirits, their minds stirred with intense desire, gathered the lotus maṇḍala as it expanded. Just as iron filings cling to a magnet, the great rākṣasī, the man-eating rākṣasī, the Red One, the Joyful One, the Slayer, the Great Black One, the Great Red-Yellow One, the Great Blue-Black One, and the Great Yellow-Black One clung to the vajra body of the Blessed One, the Great Joyous One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker.

Brahmāṇī, the Agitator, the Sovereign Lady, the Pervader, and Kaumārī clung to the vajra body of the Blessed One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker. The Nectar One, the Peaceful One, the Corpse-Lady, the Eater, and the rākṣasī clung to the jewel body of the Blessed One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker.

The Drunk with Blood, the Solitary Wanderer, the Mind-Stealer, the Siddhi Lady, and the Wind Lady clung to the lotus body of the Blessed One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker. The Fire Lady, the Sow, the Aging Woman, the Noseless One, and the Water Goddess clung to the body of the Blessed One, the glorious Great Blood-Drinker, the Universal Action.

Then those wrathful maṇḍala deities of the Blessed One, the Great Joyous One, uttered the syllable Hūṃ, and the assembly of the lotus maṇḍala was gathered together and utterly crushed. Then, rejoicing, they uttered Ha Ha, and from the clouds of awakening mind there issued forth the host of the White Ladies, the host of the Thief Ladies, the host of the Bewildering Ladies, the host of the Ash-Makers, the host of the Incense Ladies, the host of the Fierce Ladies, the host of the Wart-Faced Ones, and the host of the Mother-Gatherers, each with her own implements and in wondrous array. Having issued forth, they took their places in the east, on the mark of the great blazing wheel, circling about in terrifying forms, each with her own implements.

Then, rejoicing greatly, they uttered He He, and there issued forth in wondrous array, each with her own implements, the host of the Great Lion-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Tiger-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Fox-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Dog-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Laughing-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Crow-Faced Ladies, the host of the Great Vulture-Faced Ladies, and the host of the Great Owl-Faced Ladies. Having issued forth, they took their places on the outer side of the great blazing wheel, in the east, circling about with a fierce and awe-inspiring radiance.

Then, rejoicing intensely, they pervaded all the buddha-fields of the ten directions without remainder and uttered Phaṭ. There issued forth, each with her own implements and in wondrous array, the host of the Vajra Sister-Goers, the host of the Vajra Faced Ladies, the host of the Vajra Worldly Ladies, and the host of the Vajra Corpse-Raisers. Having issued forth, they stood at the gate of the great blazing maṇḍala in an exceedingly fierce form.

Then from the clouds of joy, Phaṭ resounded from the ten directions, and all became wrathful. In an instant, all the Mātṛkā goddesses were sent forth to wherever each one's own abode was.

Then all those Blessed Ones, the Great Joyous Ones, the glorious Great Blood-Drinkers, entered into the meditative absorption called Arising of the Great Nectar of Great Compassion. From their vajra body, speech, and mind they drew forth this mantra: Oṃ vajra mahā amṛta mahā krodha aṃ aṃ aṃ. As they uttered it, Maheśvara and all the others were drawn out through the noses of those great wrathful Blessed Ones. They had been sunk in a great ocean of impure mire, and from their noses the wrathful Ucchuṣma Krodha emerged and drank up all the muck and slime, whereupon they regained their memory. Then all of that host of the wrathful maṇḍala were seen dwelling in the midst of a great blaze, with nine hundred heads, eight hundred thousand arms, and eight hundred feet.

At that time the arrogant lords who rule the three realms of existence, in the ten directions of the six worlds, were all subdued at once, by the various inconceivable means of taming, each appearing separately. Then, trembling violently, quaking all over, and speaking in voices of terror, they said these words: "We come as your subjects, we come as your subjects. If we do not serve as subjects with diligence, may our heads and bodies be split into a hundred pieces, may our hearts burst and be crushed, may we be rotted, burned, and ruined, may we fall into hell and cry out." Having sworn thus that they would become subjects, they were set upon the seats of the maṇḍala.

All of them spoke with one voice:

Our attendants, and our mothers, sisters, and daughters, we beseech you to accept into the great maṇḍala. Hero, lord of the gods, we beseech you to accept them. Together with our own retinues, we will hold this sacred maṇḍala of the assembly, even if only in name, like a blazing jewel at the crown, with a mind free of deceit and full of reverence. We will take it up, place it upon the crown of our heads, and honor it. Whatever its purposes may be, we will accomplish them completely and without remainder. If we do not act as we have spoken here before the hero's eyes, may our heads, bodies, and hearts be cut by command into pieces, and may we rot.

So they spoke. Then the hosts of their wives, and all the hosts of sisters, mothers, and daughters, came to the maṇḍala in an instant, and all of them said with one voice:

All of us, the whole assembled retinue, come as subjects of the great hero. Great hero, we beseech you to grant us the accomplishment of action.

So they spoke. Then the Blessed One, in great delight, placed a vajra in their hands, empowered them by bestowing names, and arranged them on the outer edge of the maṇḍala.

This is the fifteenth chapter, the expansive display of the cloud-like maṇḍala of the wrathful ones, from the Definitive Reality of the Secret Essence.

Then the Blessed One, in great delight, in order that these great assemblies of the maṇḍala might be accomplished through sacred commitment, caused the Tathāgata, the great blood-drinking wrathful one, together with the hosts of consorts, to bring forth these maṇḍalas of speech from the fierce power of the body, speech, and mind, the vajra wisdom.

Oṃ sarva tathāgata mahā-śrī-heruka mahā-caṇḍa sarva-duṣṭāntaka, hana daha paca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ vajra mahā-śrī-heruka mahā-caṇḍa sarva-duṣṭāntaka, hana daha paca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ ratna mahā-śrī-heruka mahā-caṇḍa sarva-duṣṭāntaka, hana daha paca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ padma mahā-śrī-heruka mahā-caṇḍa sarva-duṣṭāntaka, hana daha paca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ karma mahā-śrī-heruka mahā-caṇḍa sarva-duṣṭāntaka, hana daha paca hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ sarva tathāgata mahā-krodheśvarī sarva-duṣṭāṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ mahā-vajradhara mahā-krodheśvarī jvalinī hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ mahā-sūrya-ratna mahā-krodheśvarī pima hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ hrīḥ śata samanta padma. Oṃ mahā-sarasvatī mahā-padma mahā-krodheśvarī khaṃ hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ sarva amogha-karma mahā-krodheśvarī viśva hūṃ phaṭ.

Oṃ vajra-gaurī-ye gaurī-ha, vajra-caurī-ha, vajra-pramohā-ha, vajra-vetālī-ha, vajra-caṇḍālī-ha, vajra-pukkasī-ha, vajra-ghasmarī-ha, vajra-śmaśānī-ha. Vajra-siṃha-mukhī-he, vajra-vyāghra-mukhī-he, vajra-sṛgāla-mukhī-he, vajra-śvāna-mukhī-he, vajra-gṛdhra-mukhī-he, vajra-kaṅka-mukhī-he, vajra-kāka-mukhī-he, vajra-ulūka-mukhī-he. Vajra-ārya-teja-teja-rāja. Vajra-amukā hūṃ. Vajra-lokā baṃ. Vajra-bhasmi-sma-lavato hoḥ. Bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo, bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo, bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo, bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo. Oṃ rulu rulu rulu hūṃ. Ehyehi ānaya. Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ. Oṃ vajra-krodha-samaya hūṃ.

Oṃ, you who pacify through wrath, hosts of compassionate, glorious, wrathful and fierce ones, marvelous and blazing blessing, grant it to me right here.

Oṃ vajra-krodha-samaya stvaṃ. Oṃ vajra-krodha-samaya hoḥ. Oṃ vajra-krodha-samaya phaṭ. Ali uli tali tali bali daṣṭa gaunara-tri khaṃ raṃ.

Yo-gi-nī, khā-hi-hoḥ, hūṃ ha he phaṭ bhyo. By this utterance, all the ten directions of the six worlds were wholly ablaze, utterly ablaze, completely and utterly ablaze. They blazed, blazed forth, blazed completely and utterly. Everywhere they were filled with hosts of blazing maṇḍalas, filled to fullness, completely and utterly full.

This is the sixteenth chapter, the elaboration of the speech maṇḍala of the great host of wrathful ones, from the Secret Essence, the Ascertainment of Reality.

Then the Blessed One, in great delight, spoke this utterance in order to reveal the maṇḍala of those same beings.

A blazing wheel with four spokes,
adorned all around with four corners,
four-sided, with four gateways,
beautified by blazing double intervals.
Garlands of skulls and snakes shine like suns,
and it is stirred by many rays of blazing light.
Supreme bulls, buffalo, leopards, and tigers,
and ferocious bears with their claws
seize Īśvara, the Great God (Śiva), and the rest.
Dark purple, dark blue, dark yellow,
dark red, dark green, their bodies terrifying,
with three heads, six arms, and four legs spread wide,
they wear wet hides and clothing of many kinds.
They roar with fearsome, thundering cries,
resplendent with snakes and skull garlands like sun and moon.
Together with the thousandfold world-system,
they hold vajras, great conch shells filled to the brim,
swords, battle-axes, and daggers,
bearing their various weapons.
Joined by hosts of fearsome consorts,
beautiful with the mudrās of place and region
and the mudrās of the four gates,
adorned with the messengers, the maidens, and the hosts of female servants,
twelve and eight in number,
each with her own seat and weapon,
they stand ready, saying, "What shall we do?"

By this utterance, the blazing maṇḍala became clearly manifest everywhere in all the ten directions of the six worlds.

This is the seventeenth chapter, the revelation of the wrathful maṇḍala, from the Secret Essence, the Ascertainment of Reality.

Then the Blessed One, in great delight, spoke this great offering of gratification.

Here, regarding this supreme offering:
first, liberate your own self through realization and familiarity.
Then, with non-dual intelligence,
liberate the world of base minds, the objects of compassion,
as nondual.
Through the union of the great offering of intertwining,
gratify yourself, and through gratification gratify others.
Offer the great accomplishing substances of equality
to the assembly that is equal to yourself:
food, hard food, drink, and clothing,
all that possesses the five sense enjoyments.
Maṇḍala dissolves into maṇḍala.
The Sugatas who go through the ten directions and four times,
their qualities are a great marvel.
They do not come from elsewhere;
why speak of gods, demons, and the like?
Those fit for yoga practice
become fully accomplished in the great mudrā,
and when radiance and mind are nondual,
the great maṇḍala will blaze forth.

By this utterance, great gratification pervaded all the ten directions of the six worlds.

This is the eighteenth chapter, the revelation of the supreme offering, from the Secret Essence, the Ascertainment of Reality.

Then the Blessed One, in great delight, spoke this great pledge in order to make the mantra-holders' practice meaningful.

When the unsurpassed vehicle is well ascertained,
even if one engages in all five desires and the afflictions,
what is done does not take life, and gathers the accumulations;
moral discipline and vows are perfected.
In the supreme pledge of the unsurpassed,
through the power of taming, discipline
and all the immeasurable vows,
wholly gathered together, are completely pure.
Not even the middle way of existence and nonexistence is apprehended;
the manner is like an illusion or a mirage.
The lifeless has no life to be cut off;
even "life" is merely a person's mistaken conception.
Because the two truths are inseparable,
the manner is one of delighted display, not different.
Because there is no other and no taking of the ungiven,
there is no grasping, all being the expanse itself.
Phenomena are like illusions,
and what is imputed as name and word is false.

Practicing falsehood in falsehood itself,
"falsehood" is only a label; it has no existence.
Attachment to the unattached,
and in attachment itself, no attachment:
this is the supreme Brahmā, the king,
the great one of utmost attachment.

Not abandoning the unsurpassed, honoring the master,
not severing the continuity of mantra and mudrā,
loving those who have entered the true path,
and not speaking the secret meaning itself:
these are the five roots,
the supreme pledges of accomplishing and guarding.

Not abandoning delusion, attachment, aversion,
pride, and jealousy;
not discarding the white substance, the red substance,
the odor, and the great flesh,
the pure vessel and its essence:
these are the pledges of the ten branches,
to be practiced through realizing the primordial purity and equality.

The five pledges of guarding and accomplishing
are the roots; if they are broken, one becomes without lineage.
The five and the two, those of not abandoning and not discarding,
are the branch pledges, difficult to transgress.

By joining the equal with the equal,
if one abides in the pledge of equality,
one will attain the great equality and completeness.
Having passed beyond, one is not other than a buddha.

Those who have fallen from the roots
should not delay in striving to restore them.
They should not speak, even for a moment or an instant;
it is not fitting to proclaim the fault of one who has fallen.
If the root pledges are broken,
all one's practice turns astray.
Various unpleasant results
come upon one against one's wishes.
If the branch pledges are broken,
there is no result, and one falls into the lower realms.

The pledges are the great vajra,
the very self of all the buddhas.
Among the five root pledges,
each is divided into two, and then into thirty.
Among the five and two branch pledges,
each is divided into twenty.
These pledges are a great wonder.
In the ten directions of the six worlds,
as many beings as there are in the three realms of existence,
so many are the pledges that tame conceptual thought, and so many they emanate.

Moreover, of the supreme Victor Samantabhadra,
of all the mudrās without exception,
every holy means of accomplishment is accomplished without exception.
These and the like are the supreme, the limitless.
Those who hold the supreme lineage of the Victors
are honored by the lord of the world and his retinue.
The holy and the supreme,
sons and brothers, bless them with their intention.
They dwell in the very realm of the Sugata,
fearless, joined with Samantabhadra.
Suchness itself and the means of taming,
all the vows, inconceivable in number,
are wholly pure and spontaneously accomplished.
If they decay, they are made whole by restoration.
These and the like are the supreme, the limitless.

By speaking thus, the Tathāgata himself was tamed in the Tathāgata himself.

This is the nineteenth chapter, the chapter on the pledges, from the Essence of Secrets, the Ascertainment of Suchness.

Then the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, entered the meditative absorption called Blessing the Spontaneously Accomplished Pledges of Great Joy, and spoke this inspired utterance.

E, supreme maṇḍala of the assembly,
blazing, fierce, great, and wrathful:
make offerings with a wrathful mind.
Even the merit-body of a buddha is destroyed.
For the five nectars or the five foods,
make signs and give names.
Having summoned, strike with the vajra dagger;
having reduced to dust, offer it to the assembly.
In the maṇḍala of the assembly of E,
having bound the effigy to the lineage,
if it is bound, and moved, it trembles in the ten directions;
if one is intoxicated, it may be burned.

Vaṃ, supreme maṇḍala of the assembly,
blazing with great splendor, the great Meru:
make offerings with a mind of attachment.
Even the vajra speech comes under one's power.
For the five nectars or the five foods,
make signs and give names.
Strike with the vajra dagger of attachment;
offer it, dissolving into the assembly of attachment.
In the maṇḍala of the assembly of Vaṃ,
having bound the effigy to the lineage,
what is summoned, the vajra too, follows behind.
Whatever is desired comes just so.

Ma, supreme maṇḍala of the assembly,
blazing, emanating, bestowing splendor.

With a joyful mind, make the offering. Its qualities are equal to the limits of the sky. For the five nectars or the five foods, make signs and give them names. Regard them as a treasure of wish-fulfilling qualities. Strike with the dagger of pride and joyous delight, and the vajra becomes a blazing splendor.

In the maṇḍala of the assembly of Ma, having bound the effigy to the lineage, great miraculous displays of blazing splendor stream forth, and the wish-fulfilling sky becomes full.

Ya, supreme maṇḍala of the assembly, radiant with luminous splendor: with a serene mind, make the offering. The fierce and the wrathful become scorching blaze. For the five nectars or the five foods, regard them as the essence of fierce, wrathful turmoil. Strike with the dagger of luminous blaze, and offer to the assembly of blazing flame.

In the maṇḍala of the assembly of Ya, having drawn the effigy into the lineage and bound it, it is pervaded by the blessing of the blazing flame. Make everything without movement.

Then the retinue of servants, maidservants, and handmaids are given the remainders of the offerings that they desire. If one proclaims one's own pledge, they are commanded to do whatever is wished.

Long ago, the glorious Heruka, exceedingly fierce and wrathful, who subdued all without exception, through his wondrous empowerment and blessing, gathered the Great God (Śiva) and others under his power and made the retinues into servants of the lords. Those assigned their separate tasks, just as they accepted and pledged, are to carry them out swiftly and without hindrance. If they do not act as they pledged, then, as with an oath they have themselves cast aside, they shall not transgress that binding. If they transgress that binding, head, body, and heart will be cut into seven pieces by the wrathful yakṣa. Therefore let the yogī, the holder of mantra, act just as he has entrusted. If that action is not brought forth, as with an oath cast aside, they will rot, burn, and go to hell. Those who abide by the yogic pledge, who accomplish all actions, and whose retinues are protected as an only child, even the lowly spirits will gain accomplishment. Bring forth the entrusted actions. Thus he commanded. This is the chief of the actions for accomplishing the wrathful ones.

By the great songs and dances of the Great Blood-Drinkers and others, whatever is desired, all of it is accomplished. By the great songs and dances of the Great God and others of the treasury, one devours all, and leaves not even a particle of dust. If one wishes to gather, they gather; if one wishes to increase, they increase. By the great songs and dances of the Great Dark Women and others, if one wishes brilliance, they make it brilliant; if one wishes dullness, they make it dull. By the great songs and dances of the Great Lion-Faced One and others, one devours all and leaves not even a particle of dust. By the great songs and dances of the Great Laughing-Faced One and others, they draw out all, and utterly ruin all. By the great songs and dances of the servants and maidservants, one is to strike and cast away, and all is accomplished.

Trees and thickets, the one-faced goddess and the six touched by fire: with joy of faith, make them attached; with wrath, make them Kali.

Thus he spoke, and the Tathāgata himself was purified by the Tathāgata himself.

This is the twentieth chapter, on the blessing of spontaneously accomplished activity, from the Secret Essence, the Definitive Determination of Reality.

Then the Blessed One, through the maṇḍala of the assembly of the great joyful ones, took up this song in an exceedingly fierce tone.

Hūṃ! Great fierce one, blazing like the fire at the end of time, with the splendor of a hundred thousand sunbeams, moving like a thousand wrathful lightnings, with fangs, a great devourer of the good and the sublime, ho!

Hūṃ! With the fierce roar of a thousand thunders, the sound of crushing a hundred thousand great Merus, the great laughter of a-a-ha-la, the great agitation of the scattering wind of the staff, ho!

Hūṃ! The wrathful one, the great jewel of light of wisdom.

Hūṃ! Luminous throughout the maṇḍala of wisdom, blazing wisdom that crushes all, the great bindu of manifold wisdom, ho!

Hūṃ! King of the wrathful ones, the great cloud, the maṇḍala of wrath sends down a great rain. The maṇḍala is a wish-fulfilling treasure-mine, the great bindu of manifold wrath, ho!

Hūṃ! The great māra of all māras, the bundle of māras that crushes the māras. Even the host of terrors is made to tremble, the great terrifier, the great bindu, ho!

Vajra rock, the unyielding one. Vajra river, the gatherer. Vajra fire, the great all-blazing one. Vajra wind, the great scattering wind, ho!

With these words he took up this song, with deliberate intent.

This is the twenty-first chapter, the praise of the wrathful one, from the Definitive Reality of the Secret Essence.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Joyful One, spoke to the Tathāgata himself this king of mantras, the Firm Seizing.

Kye kye! This very nature of the ten directions and four times is the essential nature of the Tathāgatas. Yet it is seized, one by one, by the noose of conceptual thought, which spreads out in the elaboration of grasper and grasped.

The distinctive arrangement of the grounds is also the path that leads to the secret essence. Not one of the countless marvels of wisdom has ever been taught as anything other than its meaning.

This great secret seal of all the Tathāgatas, this definitive truth: whoever, having realized it, speaks of it, that very one is I, and the empowerment too is complete.

For all the Tathāgatas there is no secret other than this. That very secret essence, which pacifies superimposition and denial, was drawn forth from the expanse of definitive truth. This is declared with certainty: the child is born from the heart, and the ground abides in the knowledge-holder.

Thus he spoke. Delighted in inseparable unity, all the Tathāgatas dwelt as the very ornament of the dense array of body, speech, and mind, in the expanse of the equality of the four times.

This is the supreme fruit of those wheels turned, in which everything without exception is elaborated from the chapter on the Definitive Reality of the Secret Essence, the secret of all the Tathāgatas, the general scriptural source of all the characteristics and tantras, from the Noble King of Thought, the Net of Illusion, in one hundred thousand chapters.

This is the twenty-second chapter, on pleasing and total embrace, from the Definitive Reality of the Secret Essence. It is complete.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

This is the opening of the Guhyagarbha Tantra, as the title and the Samantabhadra homage show. The translator colophon-style Sanskrit title, Śrī Guhyagarbha Tattvaviniścaya, is rendered from the Tibetan as given. The Tibetan "mnam par bya ba" and "mnam byed" (smell) are rendered as smelling, following the context of the four senses; "'joms pa chen po" is rendered "Great Destroyer," a reading of an obscure sequence on touch, and the exact names there are uncertain. The "tassels and fringes" and a few ornament terms (chun 'phyang, shar bu) are rendered by their general sense. "Sovereign peacocks" renders the throne of dbang rma bya.  The first line, beginning with the Great Destroyer of touch-consciousness, continues the preceding passage's series of senses. The Tibetan phrase "སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་ལས" in the E MA verses is rendered "from the unborn." The names in the elemental verse follow the standard Buddhist Tantra identifications, which the Tibetan renders partly by epithet: Locanā for "the Eye," and Pāṇḍarā for "the White-Robed." The syllables E MA and KYE MA are left as exclamations. Several lines in the opening verse are terse and could be read with different syntax, but the sense given is the traditional one.  The line "from the without-coming-or-going" etc. belongs to the preceding passage and is not re-translated. The phrase "six Sages" renders thub pa drug, the six emanation Sages of the six classes of beings. "Six worlds of the lower and upper realms" is a literal rendering of a somewhat obscure phrase (snrel zhi dang yan man gyi 'jig rten drug); the reading is tentative. The final verse line is cut off at the passage boundary and presumably continues in the next passage.  The opening lines are syntactically terse and their relation to the preceding verse is uncertain; I have rendered them as a continuation. Lines such as "self, other than self, and the stream of conceptual thought are the supreme... vehicle" and "four vehicles / one vehicle" are translated literally; the doctrinal sense is the tantric view that conceptuality is itself pure in its nature. In the Wheel of the Garland of Letters, the numbers forty-two and forty-five do not match the letters listed, so I have kept the verse's own figures. "Ema" is the exclamation of wonder (Skt. aho/ema), left transliterated. "Six sages" refers to the emanations of the Sage in each of the six classes of beings.  The text is a letter-by-letter symbolism of the Sanskrit alphabet. Some lines are terse and a few correspondences appear corrupt in the transmitted text, notably the first Tha, which seems to duplicate the dental series, and "Ḍa," which is given as "Ḍa" in the first series but "Da" in the later one. I have followed the Tibetan as it stands. The "four hundred and four diseases" is the standard traditional count.  Several lines are corrupt or obscure: "iron to gold" renders the Tibetan "gold-turning medicine" loosely; the sense-power beings (seer, hearer, smeller, taster) and the "six sages" follow the usual identification. The title translates "Secret Essence" with Definitive Reality (tattvaviniścaya), likely the Guhyagarbha.  The phrase rendered "the unchanging svastika body" (གཡུང་དྲུང་སྐུ) is a standard epithet of the indestructible, unchanging body, but its sense in this tantric context is lightly uncertain. The line "all true blemishes are cleared away" (དངོས་ཀྱི་མདོག་ངན) is obscure and may reflect a corrupt reading. The mantra syllables are given in reconstructed Sanskrit transliteration from the Tibetan transcription; some syllables are corrupt or opaque and are not translated.  The opening syllable strings are transcribed in Tibetan script with unclear letters (possibly corrupt or deliberately coded); I have given them as written. The mantras are restored to their evident Sanskrit forms: for example, the five wisdoms (emptiness, mirror-like, discriminating, equality, and accomplishing wisdom), though the Tibetan wording of the first reads "mahā-śūnyatā-jñāna." The phrase "the speech of the blissful one" (bde ldan gsung) is uncertain in reference. The final line breaks off mid-passage, so it is left incomplete. The verse "dper na de bzhin sbrid sangs bzhin" is obscure and probably corrupt; my rendering is tentative.  The Tibetan text is plainly corrupt or terse in places; this is a ritual visualization of seed syllables and emblems, and I have rendered it closely. Several seed syllables appear in distorted forms (for example Phyvaṃ, Rtāṃ, Sphoṭa), and I have kept them as given. The line "Akṣobhya's sun-disk letter" from the preceding context is not resumed here. The phrase "five and two" and the "twelve and six" radiations are numerical enumerations that the commentarial tradition would unpack; I have left them literal. "Lord of elaboration" for the limbs' source is a tentative reading.  The unusually subtle chapter title and the line "Abiding itself is not abiding" follow the Tibetan as written. The measure ཚ་ནའི་འབྲུ (tsa na) is rendered "jujube seed" as a best-fit reading; the identity of the plant is uncertain. "Supreme of Speech" renders དག་མཆོག, an epithet of the speaker. "Lord of all that is made" for ཀུན་བྱས་དབང་ཕྱུག is a literal rendering of a difficult phrase. The "great self" (བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ) is taken as the maṇḍala deity or Vajradhara.  The passage is dense and cryptic tantric prose-verse; several lines are syntactically ambiguous. "Two postures, or else the five" (stangs dbyal) is rendered literally and may refer to specific ritual postures or gestures. "Sovereign of the family" and "wisdom drop" (jñānabindu/tilaka) are rendered by sense. The measures (finger-span, cubit, krośa) follow the usual readings of mdzub gang, khru, and rgyang grags.  The passage breaks off mid-sentence at the end, so my rendering is deliberately left open there. In the Hūṃ Oṃ Svā Aṃ Hā verse, the syllables are left as mantra seeds. The listening, speaking, and other wheels are rendered as faculties by interpretive gloss, following the verses' evident correspondence with the five wheels of the body maṇḍala. The title of the final absorption is rendered as Transformation, King of the Net of Illusion, taking sgyur ba as the closing element of the title.  The opening lines are cryptic and the grammar is compressed: the "vajra tongue of the maṇḍala" taking up the sun-and-moon maṇḍala, and the pairing "supreme fields of transformation and lesser supreme ones," are rendered literally. "Formations of pride and of the hand" translates a terse phrase concerning divine pride and hand gestures. In the line "the beings as the mind-consorts themselves," sattvas and the mind-consort figures are identified; the sense is somewhat compressed. "Union and liberation" renders the tantric pair sbyor and sgrol, which carries a technical, esoteric sense.  The passage ends mid-sentence in the Tibetan ("by all the maṇḍalas of the buddhas..."), so the final line is left open for the next passage. The line rendered "the king of wisdom, the Tiger-like Hero" translates ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱལ་པོ་སྟངས་དཔྱལ, where the epithet is obscure and the reading is tentative. The number of grounds is given as thirteen, as in the text. In the second inspired utterance, several lines are syntactically dense and elliptical, and the rendering aims at the sense rather than a literal word order. "Āli and Kāli" are the vowel and consonant series of Sanskrit.  The lines "འཇིག་རྟེན་དྲུག་གི་ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་ན" are rendered literally ("six world-systems"); the intended referent is uncertain. "Five bodies" (སྐུ་ལྔ) is kept as in the Tibetan. The phrase "burning and scorching" renders the obscure "བསྲེགས་དང་སྦྲེབས་པ"; the second term is somewhat uncertain. "Heart-sons" renders ཉེ་བའི་སྲས, literally "near sons," the standard epithet for close spiritual disciples. "Bindu" (ཐིག་ལེ) is left in Sanskrit as a technical term.  Maheśvara is rendered "Great Sovereign" for དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ, and the form of the Blessed One is the wrathful Heruka. The mantra is given in transliteration. The phrase "joined to a former existence" (སྔོན་གྱི་སྲིད་པས་མཚམས་སྦྱར) is rendered literally, since the sense of the connection is not fully clear from this passage alone. The hungry-ghost and flesh-eating-demon (ཡི་དགས་སྲིན་པོ) compound could alternatively be read as a single class of ghostly demons.  The opening phrase, "the Blood-Drinker of the karma family," is restored from the reading as it stands. The text has an odd "ཀུན་དུ་ལས་སུ་གྱུར་ཏེ," which I take as "became the karma family," following the pattern of the preceding sentences. Several names in the long list of female spirits are rendered literally and some are uncertain, notably "Ager," "Corpse-Lady," and the epithets of the goat-headed and pot-nosed ones. The syllables in the mantras are transliterated and not translated. The sentence on the "king of kings" is syntactically awkward in the Tibetan, and I have followed its plain sense. The final sentences of the passage as given show an apparent doubling, with the vajra-body clinging repeated, and I have preserved the text as it stands.  The names of the goddess hosts are translated from the Tibetan epithets and are descriptive; several are uncertain in their Sanskrit originals. The wrathful Ucchuṣma Krodha (Ucchuṣma) is kept in Sanskrit as given in the text. Maheśvara is the Great Lord, a name of Śiva, taken here as the first of the arrogant powers drawn out and subdued.  The mantra syllables are given as reconstructed Sanskrit from the Tibetan transliteration, and several strings are corrupt or opaque, notably the section beginning "Oṃ hrīḥ śata samanta padma" and the final line "Ali uli tali..." They are best treated as untranslatable mantric syllables. "Hero" (dpa' bo) here refers to the central Blessed One, Heruka. The phrase "even if only in name" follows the sense of "just the name" of the maṇḍala being held. In the verse, "cut by command" renders "bka' gtubs," which could also be read "hacked apart."  The Tibetan opens with a transliterated mantra, rendered here as sounds. In the sixth line of the maṇḍala verse, དབང་ཕྱུག་ལྷ་ཆེན (Īśvara, Mahādeva) is glossed as Śiva. The offering verse is syntactically difficult. "Liberate" renders བསྒྲལ, which here carries the tantric sense of ritual liberation, and the line "base minds, the objects of compassion" is a tentative reading. "Gratify yourself, and through gratification gratify others" is a literal-minded rendering of a compressed line. In the pledge verse, the antinomian opening (that one may engage the five desires without harm) is stated within the tantric frame of nondual view and should be read that way, as the following lines on emptiness of life and taking confirm. Line "the lifeless has no life to be cut off" renders སྲོག་མེད་སྲོག་གཅོད་བཅད་དུ་མེད་ as understood.  Several lines are corrupt or elliptical in the Tibetan, so I rendered them conservatively: "Practicing falsehood in falsehood itself" (the text has a stray space after བརྫུན་), "not abandoning the unsurpassed" (བླ་མེད་), and the clauses on the effigy (ལུ་གུ་རྒྱུད་དུ་སྦྲེལ་བསྡམས་) and "if it is bound, and moved." The "white substance, red substance, odor, and great flesh" are the standard impure substances of the Guhyagarbha-type pledge lists, kept literal. "Branch pledges" are listed as five and two, as in the text. The bīja syllables E, Vaṃ, and Ma open the maṇḍala-of-the-assembly sections and are left as syllables. The last line breaks off at the end of the passage.  This is a ritual-tantric passage with corrupt and obscure readings, and the translation is provisional in places. The lines on "the six touched by fire" and "make them Kali," and the tradition of the Tathāgata purifying himself, are cryptic and rendered literally. The seed-syllables Ma and Ya continue the sequence of the preceding passage. "Effigy" renders the Tibetan word lugu, as in the prior passage, and "lowly spirits" renders a doubtful term for a lesser class of beings. "Great Dark Women" and "Great Laughing-Faced One" are literal renderings of epithets, for which the sources suggest named goddesses of the retinue.  The refrain ཐིག་ལེ་ཆེ is rendered "great bindu" in the opening verses, keeping the Sanskrit for the drop or seed-syllable sense. The phrase "the Firm Seizing" translates the mantra-king's title, with ཡོངས་སུ་གཟུང་བ in the colophon rendered "total embrace." The line "the child is born from the heart, and the ground abides in the knowledge-holder" is terse, and the exact referents of "child" and "ground" are lightly uncertain. The phrase "Great Joyful One" renders the Blessed One's epithet dgyes pa chen po.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
