The Hundred and Eight Names of the Buddha, the Blessed One, together with the Dhāraṇī-Mantra

The Hundred and Eight Names of the Buddha, the Blessed One, together with the Dhāraṇī-Mantra (Tibetan: Sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das kyi mtshan brgya rtsa brgyad pa gzungs sngags dang bcas pa) is a short devotional text that praises the Buddha through a series of epithets. It opens with homage to the Omniscient One and then celebrates the Blessed One's fragrant, compassionate body, his marks and signs, and his radiant smile and features. The listing of a hundred and eight names is combined with a dhāraṇī-mantra, a formula of protective and merit-bringing recitation. The work is Toh 873 in the Kangyur, the collection of translated words of the Buddha, where it is classed among the dhāraṇī and related ritual texts of the canon. Its Sanskrit title is not given in the lines above, so it is best described simply as a litany of the Buddha's names intended for praise, recitation, and blessing.

The Hundred and Eight Names of the Buddha, the Blessed One, together with the Dhāraṇī-Mantra.

Homage to the Omniscient One.

Homage to the Blessed One, whose body is anointed with the fragrant incense of the sandalwood of compassion; whose lotus feet are touched by gods and asuras wearing jeweled crowns; the self-arisen, the dispeller, the guru, who brings benefit to the whole world; the Teacher, the Tathāgata; the Sage free of faults, whose nature is peace; beautiful of form, splendid with clear major marks, his body adorned with the minor marks, perfectly complete in every quality.

His face smiles like a blossoming lotus. His teeth are white, even, and well set, fully revealed and shining, luminous and lovely like a stainless jewel, bright and clear. He outshines the disk of light of many suns blazing with a thousand rays. Homage to the supreme Sage endowed with the ten powers. I bow. I bow down deeply. I offer praise.

Oṃ bho hūṃ hūṃ, ā ā, hī hī, śiva śiva, śānti śānti, śama śama, śamāpaya, tathāgatānugata, svabhāva, abhāva, samuttāya, asamabala, aviralabala, amitabala, atibala, hūṃ ghuṃ ghuṃ, dhau dhau, bhrau bhrau, bhvedu bhvedu, hī hī, bhagavāna, bhavānataka surata bhoga mahāśāntikara, pāpakilbiṣa nāśaka svāhā.

Then, with the minor marks and the clear major marks
All his limbs are richly adorned;
He is radiant like the sun,
Bearing the ornament of a blazing halo.
Renowned, he has cast off the fence of stains;
Stainless, faultless, his mind is the Dharma;
The great all-pervading lord, endowed with the ten powers,
Free of dust and possessed of glory.

On a great ground of precious jewels,
At the palace's peak, the vajra summit,
Where the children of the Victor dwell,
Where many jewels shine forth
And stainless rays are clearly arrayed,
In the palace of the vajra maṇḍala,
On the ground of the Sage's enjoyment,
He sits upon a vast great lion throne.
On that ground of gems and precious stones,
On that most splendid great throne,
The Tathāgata, in great delight,
Gazes upon the perfect array of ornaments.

The Sage, with the light of fire, moon, and jewels,
Has a radiance that outshines the sun's rays.
At ease, in a most auspicious manner,
Luminous, seated in the cross-legged posture,
Encircled by a halo of blazing bodily light,
The Lord of Sages, vast in luminosity,
Sends forth his stainless rays.
Then the one called Unmoving Vajra-Holder,
Having purified all those vajra-holders,
Well tamed, who had entered the great maṇḍala,
Circles the stainless maṇḍala.
Having thoroughly purified
All stains of the lower realms and of the commitments,
He circles the vast maṇḍala of the three worlds,
Luminous in manifold ways,
Together with all that moves and all that does not move;
Then the Vajra-Holder of Great Bliss,
Bearing the vajra sword,
His crown unmoving, entered within.

Then, filling all with a terrifying roar,
His eyes flashing like lightning,
Proclaiming the vidyā-mantra Hūṃ,
Vajrabhairava, the one who terrifies,
His lovely face adorned with a smile,
Sinless, his gaze grown fierce,
Rose from his seat and bowed,
Made fitting offerings, and spoke:

"Ah! This destroys the realm of birth,
Clears away the stains of many eons,
And accomplishes the qualities of the vidyā-mantra;
It was proclaimed by the supreme Sages.
Seeing it, one finds many virtues,
And the wisdom of a buddha grows vast.
Even a bodhisattva of great intelligence,
Practicing for a whole eon,
Having heard this fragrance of a hundred qualities,
From which all buddhas arise in succession
And from which many modes of conduct come forth,
Could not fully set it forth.

"Possessing a great ocean of enjoyments,
Empowered by the supreme Victors
In the maṇḍala of supreme bodhicitta,
One is endowed with the quality of irreversibility.
Hearing this, the conduct of the buddhas,
All the misdeeds of every sentient being
Are completely cleared away without remainder,
And they become great minds free of stain.

"Peaceful, purifying, and auspicious,
Adorned and free of dust, it brings peace.
Virtuous, it dispels all sorrow
And surely destroys all suffering.
It is the sublime secret mantra that brings under control;
It clears away all misdeeds upon the earth
And surely grants an excellent result.
It is the teaching; it tames hatred;
It clears away the wrongs that have been done.

"Whoever has heard this dhāraṇī
Will before long attain
Buddhahood, so hard to find.
All obscurations are fully pacified,
And the all-pervading lord clears away all afflictions.
Whoever holds this dhāraṇī
That pacifies the afflictions
Will attain the state of Samantabhadra
And the state of Vajrapāṇi as well.
Even lordship over the vidyādharas
Is attained by hearing this.

"Even the Blessed Vairocana,
Who shines brilliantly in every world,
For as long as he had not heard
This unfathomable, sublime maṇḍala,
Did not attain the self-arisen state
Of perfect peace that tames the afflictions.
For the sake of purification he heard it,
And the instant he heard it he was utterly purified.
Therefore those who wish for excellence
And for goodness should recite it.

"Having heard the dhāraṇī that others cannot overcome,
That which all the Sages have attained,
Freedom, never again in this saṃsāra,
From the works of Māra and from turmoil,
Freedom from sorrow and from strife,
Is attained by abiding in the dhāraṇī.
Having attained the sublime state,
The Sage of stainless mind
Will go to that excellent destination
To which those of noble vision have gone.

"Those who wish for goodness
Should listen to this sūtra of words.
For bringing the afflictions to an end,
This dhāraṇī spoken by the Victor is supreme.
One who commits misdeeds and hates virtue,
Whose nature is steeped in wrongdoing,
If, having heard it, he gives that up,
Will flourish before my very eyes.
Commit no further misdeeds,
And confess those done before.
By the power and might of this supreme dhāraṇī
All misdeeds will be cleansed.
Whatever unwholesome misdeeds were done
In thousands of other lifetimes,
And even in hundreds of millions of lifetimes,
Will be purified; of this there is no doubt.

"On the eighth day of the waxing fortnight,
And likewise on the fifteenth day,
Earnestly take up the purificatory fast
And worship the Buddha according to the rite.
Then, free of delusion,
Utterly destroying the enemy, the afflictions,
If one recites the dhāraṇī that averts faults,
Most difficult to overcome and beyond compare,
One will surely behold
The blazing moonlight of the Sage's face.
Thereby one becomes a child of the Victor
Whose accumulations are complete.
That which Amitābha possesses,

The boundless, vastly flourishing qualities,
Whose limit is not fathomed even in a thousand ten-millions of eons,
One will attain."

Then, having heard the words of the Vajra Holder,
those dwelling in the maṇḍalas
offer various ornaments
to the Blessed One.
Vajra, Sword, and the rest,
all the illustrious lords of the gods,
the vidyādharas dwelling
on Mount Kailāsa and on Meru,
likewise the vidyādharas
seated in the great maṇḍala,
those who dwell on Mount Malaya
bearing blazing ornaments,
the lords of the gods
such as Viṣṇu and the Great God (Śiva),
and the bodhisattvas of great power
such as Vajrapāṇi,
their bodies swaying with jeweled armlets,
earrings, and ornaments,
stirred and rose up.
Bowing to the Victor, the sinless sovereign,
and joining their palms,
all of them praised that holy one,
lord of the earth, supreme Sage,
with the hundred and eight names:

Sameness, Dharma, suchness,
Thoroughly realized, radiant,
Tamed, steadfast, dispeller of stains,
Stainless, free of faults,
Sage, Buddha, utterly peaceful,
Protector of the world, Lord of Creatures,
Tathāgata, tamer of the afflictions,
Likewise Victor, remover of dust,
Teacher, revealer, steadfast,
Sinless, free of dust,
Protector of the world, illuminator,
Pure, peaceful, son of Śuddhodana,
Utter vanquisher of the afflictions, benefactor,
The Teacher, dispeller of stains,
Stainless in conduct, excellent in character,
Profound, subjugator, steadfast,
Mighty, loving, completely victorious,
Protector, likewise the one who protects,
Peaceful by nature, free of aversion,
Freed from bondage, definitively liberated,
Supreme over all the world, a place of refuge,
Not grasping at anything as one's own, stainless,
Dispeller of the lower realms, glorious,
Bestower of glory, likewise bestower of benefit,
Unequalled, incomparable,
All-pervading lord, abandoner of afflictions and karmas,
Without pride, without baseness,
Equal, likewise the equal of the unequalled,
Having found the light, needing no other illuminator,
Illuminator of the world, sinless,
Having abandoned all obscurations,
Striving to benefit all the world,
Hero, peaceful, pacifier,
Who brings the foes, the afflictions, to exhaustion,
Sovereign knower of means, great in means,
Refuge of all sentient beings,
Unfailing, hard to find, endowed with intelligence,
Vajra maṇḍala hard to overcome,
Protector, dispeller of fear, Brahmā,
Likewise Buddha, holder of the Dharma,
Great hero, fearless,
Of beautiful form, clear in his marks,
Possessing the thirty-two major marks,
An ocean of the enjoyment of Dharma,
Adorned by the array of excellent minor marks,
Displaying wonders,
Teacher without hardship,
Likewise gentle, giver of bliss,
Mighty, vast, expansive,
Dispeller of the forces of the four māras,
Of great diligence, great enthusiasm,
Great delight, great strength,
Having attained power, greatly steadfast,
Established, flourishing through might,
Clear, endowed with speech, incomparable,
Virtuous, victorious through emptiness,
Utterly peaceful, without darkness,
Of great intellect, holder of the Dharma,
Endowed with perfection, having attained the great ground,
Tamer of desires,
Bestower of glory, possessor of glory, glorious,
Whose enjoyment flourishes greatly through glory,
Blessed One who gives well-spoken commands,
Endowed with speech, auspicious, abode of the victors,
Sameness, knower of sameness,
Of measureless marks through sameness,
Utterly joyful, of clear enjoyment,
Grounded and even in intention,
Pure in mind, intelligent, with stains abandoned,
Steadfast in the great abode,
Of vast enjoyment, stainless,
Sage possessing the ornament of compassion,
Fortunate one, refuge from fear,
Likewise fearless, dispeller of the afflictions,
Stainless, faultless, rich in enjoyment,
Endowed with manifold light, beautiful maṇḍala,
Of beautiful body, supreme in the stages of virtue,
Radiant with compassion, of excellent light,
Holy one of non-abiding enjoyment,
Cause of the Dharma, abode of qualities,
Worthy of veneration, supreme abode, of great enjoyment,
Marked like space, of utterly pure mind,
Like a jeweled form, auspicious,
Great bull, great-eyed, with lashes like a cow's,
Victor, dispeller of faults, possessor of wisdom,
Endowed with wisdom and means,
Transcending all the non-virtue of the world,
Steadfast in pure enjoyment,
Possessing the grounds, the powers, wisdom, and patience,
And all the perfections,
Enjoying the evenness of samādhi,
Directly perceiving the doors of liberation,
Equal to all buddhas in giving,
Great Dharma dawning in bliss,
Gone beyond objects as the omniscient one,
Whose sphere of activity is unobscured,
Victorious lord of bodhisattvas,
Ultimate meaning, great in manner,
Having attained unobscured dawning
Upon all objects of knowledge without exception,
Born in harmony with a great family,
Abode of the virtue of the Tathāgatas,
Having attained distinction, having attained sameness,
Unequalled, equal to all buddhas,
Having utterly completed the great aim,
Free of afflictions, hard to overcome,
Śramaṇa, purifier of evil,
Who brings forth bliss without harm,
Of vast mind, omniscient,
Who has heard all the weapons of learning without exception,
Through whom the rare is easily attained,
Equal, distinguished, endowed with domain,
Protector who makes all the world flourish,
Whose weapon of calm abiding is hard to overcome,
Inconceivable, whose domain is beyond thought,
Incomparable, yet the model for comparison,
Of excellent light, utterly joyful, glorious,
Of eloquent speech, arising through the power of intellect,
Learned, of beautiful face, giver of bliss,
Utterly joyful, whose sphere has gone beyond,
Great speaker, of great wisdom,
Great abode, of great auspiciousness,
Worshipped, beyond objects,
Without the characteristics of deeds,
Born in the domain of the buddhas,
Whose sphere of the knowable is vast,
Bearing the fruit of omniscient enjoyment,
Whose sphere has passed beyond the world's power,
The light of the domain of omniscience,
Possessing means, perfectly endowed,
Endowed with the means of miraculous play,
Teacher of the methods of the dance of Dharma,

Who teaches fully and transforms qualities,
Who tames every kind of conduct without exception,
Perfectly complete and utterly pure,
Fully awakened, abiding in the domain of the buddhas,
Who destroys obstructors and those who do evil,
Who dispels the arrogance of Māra,
Who won complete victory on the field of battle,
Great hero of unconquered strength,
Who rides the chariot of the Great Vehicle,
Great-minded one who has gone to the far shore
Of the ocean of afflictions, so hard to cross,
Who abides in the way of the Great Vehicle,
Who delights in the supreme vehicle,
Whose domain surpasses that of the śrāvakas,
Who has gone beyond even the pratyekabuddhas,
Who abides in the fruit of the buddha ground,
Who knows distinctions ever higher and higher.
You dwell in the abode of space,
And delight in the great lakes
Of the grounds and realms that are sources of bliss.

Having praised the mighty Lord of Buddhas
With the hundred and eight names,
The assembled gods and others bowed to him,
Lowered their heads, and sat to one side.
Then all who were present in the great maṇḍala
Sat in hushed stillness.
The one who wore a vajra headband upon his head
Rose, his crown swaying,
And filling the whole lofty maṇḍala
With a great resounding voice,
His jewel ornaments swaying,
He proclaimed with a cry of "Ha ha":

"Oh! Great are the qualities of the Buddha,
Gathered over three countless eons.
The supreme ones, bodhisattvas and others,
Have well proclaimed the hundred and eight names.
Oh! Whoever hears these hundred and eight names,
Source of gain and of happiness,
And recites them and praises the Victor,
Will accomplish a great fruit.
If one recites the hundred and eight names together with the mantra
In the presence of the Blessed One,
One attains purification of obscurations,
Of thorough affliction, and of all misdeeds.
If one recites the supreme hundred and eight names,
One is definitively freed from all obscurations,
Abandons every affliction without exception,
And becomes one of great wisdom.
Such a person will never fall away
From great wealth and happiness.
In all lifetimes, that intelligent one
Will remember past lives."

Then the Blessed One, victorious over Māra,
Looked directly at that son of boundless qualities
Who wore the vajra headband,
And declared:
"This ground of the Victors is peace;
It vanquishes pride and the other afflictions;
It transcends all worldly happiness
And faces directly toward the bliss of the Tathāgatas.
Those who listen to this dhāraṇī, which none can overcome,
And to the hundred and eight names,
Are of utterly pure nature,
Wishing happiness for all sentient beings.
Even by merely hearing it a single time,
They abide in the fruit of the great ground.
If before long they come to joy,
What need is there to speak of holding it and the rest?
Therefore, those who wish for lasting happiness
Should always strive with diligence,
And should listen to and hold
This dhāraṇī endowed with an ocean of qualities.
Whoever rises in the morning and recites it,
Reciting it oneself,
Will accomplish all aims
And will never meet with harm.
This is the vessel of all qualities,
Bestowing perfect virtue;
It brings attainment of the source of bliss,
The supreme fruit, unsurpassed omniscience.
Whatever fruit or prosperity one seeks,
There is no fear of failing to attain it.
Having attained the state of omniscience,
One will go to the incomparable abode.
It is virtuous and bears fruit;
It bestows the fruit of the buddha ground;
It is delightful and endowed with qualities,
Bestowing stainless compassion.
This is the sūtra of equality,
Which gladdens the entire world,
The source of happiness for all the world;
There is nothing that equals it."

The Hundred and Eight Names of the Teacher, the Buddha, the Blessed One, together with the Dhāraṇī-Mantra, is complete.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The mantra is given in a standardized romanization of the transliterated Sanskrit as it stands in the Tibetan. Several syllables, such as "samuttāya" and "bhvedu," look irregular but are kept as transmitted. "Asamabala" reads the Tibetan "asamapala" as "bala" to match the series of "-bala" terms.

The line rendered "will flourish before my very eyes" literally says "by me directly will prosper or come into presence." It may instead mean that such a person will come into the speaker's own presence.

The speaker in the verses is the wrathful vajra-holder who has just risen to speak. His Tibetan name, rdo rje 'jigs byed, is the standard rendering of Vajrabhairava.

"Unmoving Vajra-Holder" (mi g.yo rdo rje can) and "Vajra-Holder of Great Bliss" (bde chen rdo rje can) are kept as descriptive translations. Their Sanskrit forms, perhaps Acalavajrin and Mahāsukhavajrin, are not securely identified.

The final line breaks off mid-sentence and continues in the next piece.  The term rendered "place of refuge" (Tibetan 'khra ba'i sa, 'khra sa, occurring twice) is unclear, and the rendering is conjectural from context. "Vajra, Sword, and the rest" may refer to named deities or to deities identified by their emblems. The Tibetan could also be read as a single "Vajra Sword." The phrase rendered "on Mount Kailāsa and on Meru" is literally "on the Meru of Mount Kailāsa." It may instead mean Kailāsa as the king of mountains. The epithet "with lashes like a cow's" reads rdzi ma as eyelashes, matching the major mark of cow-like eyelashes. In "a thousand ten-millions of eons," bye ba is a koṭi, that is, ten million.  The figure who rises to speak, "the one who wore a vajra headband," is described rather than named in the Tibetan. It may stand for a bodhisattva name, possibly something like Vajroṣṇīṣa, but this cannot be confirmed, so it is rendered descriptively.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
