The Noble Mañjuśrī's Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities (Ārya-Mañjuśrī-karma-catuścakra-guhya-tantra)

The Noble Mañjuśrī's Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities, in Sanskrit Ārya-Mañjuśrī-karma-catuścakra-guhya-tantra and in Tibetan Phakpa Jampal Lé Zhi Khorlo Sangwé Gyü, is a tantra associated with the wrathful forms of Mañjuśrī. It opens with homage to the noble Mañjuśrī as the wisdom being, then presents the Blessed One dwelling in the sky in nonduality with the Great Mother, surrounded by an assembly of wrathful ones, wrathful goddesses, mātṛkās, and other beings. Teaching from union with his consort, he speaks on a meaning free from arising and ceasing, in verses that praise the host of the great Lords of Death as unborn from the very beginning. As its title indicates, the work is concerned with the four activities of tantric practice and with the wheel, or maṇḍala, through which they are carried out. It is Toh 838 in the Kangyur, where it belongs to the class of tantras.

In the language of India: Ārya-Mañjuśrī-karma-catuścakra-guhya-tantra. In the language of Tibet: The Noble Mañjuśrī's Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities.

Homage to the noble Mañjuśrī, the wisdom being.

Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One, having become greatly delighted, was dwelling in the sky in nonduality with the Great Mother. His retinue, namely the wrathful ones, the wrathful goddesses, the mātṛkās, the servants, the subjects, and others, were present in a posture of reverence toward the Great Tathāgata.

Then the Blessed One became nondual with his consort, and he taught this meaning that is free from arising and ceasing.

The host of the great Lords of Death, unborn from the very beginning,
in the self-nature of the perfectly pure basic space,
the supreme son, nondual union, Yamāntaka, the Slayer of Death:
he is the gathering of all the wisdom
of method and wisdom that are perfectly pure.
With great compassion he accomplishes the benefit of beings;
he is the path to nirvāṇa for all sentient beings without exception.
All wisdoms are completed within his state.
In order to cut off all the faults of saṃsāra,
the glorious lord of dance, in whom desire is gathered,
though he is beyond measure, in hundreds of millions,
is shown in such a form by the power of taming.

When he had said this, all the retinue, the wrathful ones, the wrathful goddesses, and the rest, were pleased.

Then the Blessed One made this request to Mañjuśrī, the Great Yamāntaka:

To sentient beings tormented by saṃsāra
you have shown the supreme path of nirvāṇa.
By teaching this sacred doctrine,
you liberate all; how wondrous!

Thus he requested.

Then all the Tathāgatas gathered together with the Mother and spoke as follows:

Emanation bodies, immeasurable and beyond reckoning,
uncommon Mañjuśrī, the Slayer of Death:
the activities of body, speech, and mind are marvelous.
You cut down the ten nonvirtues and the acts of immediate retribution.
Free of any sting, the nature of reality is a great marvel.
The dharmakāya, the saṃbhogakāya, the perfect enjoyment body,
and the nirmāṇakāya, these three are joined in the ultimate.
The glory of the minds of the Sugatas of the ten directions,
the glory of true wisdom, is Mañjuśrī.

Having praised him thus, they became nondual with him.

Then that sacred Tathāgata was pleased that the retinue had made the request in this way, and he spoke as follows:

From the nature of peaceful, nondual reality,
the nondual essence is the meaning of the bodhisattva.
It is the unsurpassed, sacred gathering of all things.
This is the essence of the Tathāgatas, which I now explain.

Oṃ sarva tathāgata ehyehi tathāgata prabhati bodhisattva dharma dhātu ehyehi jaḥ hūṃ hyehi hyehi hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ.

Having uttered this, he expressed the meaning through symbolic gesture.

Then the Blessed One, toward the upper direction, entered into the meditative absorption that liberates all sentient beings. Through his absorption he gazed in each direction, and became one whose very nature is the power to liberate, and all beings were indeed liberated.

Then the entire host of the Mother urged the Blessed One with this sign of great delight:

Emaho! The supreme activity, the gathering of wisdom
perfected in the ten directions and three times:
for the definitive unsurpassed vehicle,
we beg you to teach it through the supreme union.

When they had urged him thus, all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions were delighted.

Then the Tathāgatas of the ten directions, together with the retinue of the lord and all those who had passed beyond sorrow, adorned with the ornaments of the body, were drawn by the delight of their respective consorts into the experience of the body. When this occurred, all the Tathāgatas, with their body hair standing on end, spontaneously uttered this:

Body, speech, and mind tame beings each in their own way.
Though never stirring from the naturally peaceful basic space,
through the four activities they tame beings each in their own way.

"Therefore I have taught this supreme king." When the Blessed One had spoken thus, the retinue became utterly delighted and joyful, and they said this:

Body, speech, and mind tame beings each in their own way.
Leading them out from basic space, you have fixed the vajra pin.
That you tame them in this way is a great wonder.

So they declared, and entering into the body, they vanished from sight.

Then all the Tathāgatas, knowing that beings are to be tamed through wrathful means, spoke thus:

To subdue the variegated ones, the spirits of the wasteland, the ogresses, the non-Buddhists,
all the māras and the misleaders,
the nature of reality is emanated like an illusion, and activity is performed.

When this was said, the retinue was filled with wonder, and they said:

Emaho! To the one who pervades all great qualities,
that wrathful forms are shown spontaneously in this way,
that such a wondrous, marvelous emanation appears,
that the utterly unruly are tamed, is a great wonder.

Then, unprompted, the Blessed One spoke thus:

The wrathful ones, taught in distinct and graded order,
show that the basic space of wisdom pervades all.
Four wrathful ones, eight, ten, and so forth:
to honor the Teacher, many wrathful ones are shown.
Pervading all by nature, wrathful by force of power, each tames in its own way.
One should understand each distinct particularity.
Fierce signs, peaceful, empowering, and enriching:
I shall explain them in reversed order.

A wheel with a hub and with spokes,
with tips that cut off saṃsāra;
the triangle, the palace of E, and A;
the three crescents, the manner of empowerment;
the outer ring, faithful and expansive.
Upon the wheel that has four aspects,
draw the supremely beautiful lines.
In the center, on the seat of a buffalo field,
at the center, tip by tip, single fields extend.
Heaps of bones pile up like waves upon a cliff;
a vast expanse of blood, rakta, like an ocean;
meteoric iron, dark and brilliantly flashing;
arrange the charnel ground, splendidly adorned.

In the center is the wrathful king, Slayer of Yama,
his body black like poison,
with three heads, white, red, and blue,
his hair a dark tuft blazing to the summit of existence.
Flames blaze at its tip, and fat drips from his waist.
At the root, water; his eyes glare in rage.
His six hands hold implements, his topknot bound:
in the right, a threatening finger, a lasso, an iron hook;
in the left, a great conch, a short spear, a clear staff.
His four feet are set downward,
in the stretching and drawing manner, gathering beings under his power.
His upper body is clad in an elephant hide across the shoulders;
his lower body in a tiger skin, with a skirt of fierce ferocity.
He stands in the center of the palace of E.

The consort, too, matches the father in form,
in the center of the palace, to the left.
She has one face and two hands, with fangs,
holding a skull-staff and a skull-bowl.
At the tip are the ten wrathful ones, father and mother,
with eyes glaring in utter rage.
Set them in order.
In the crescents are the charnel ground mother-deities,
and at the door are the guardians in just that way.
Gratify them in sequence.

So he spoke. This was drawn forth from body, speech, and mind:

Oṃ ākro mañjuśrī muṃ.
Hūṃ vajra krodha bhidannan hūṃ.
Oṃ vajra vetāli rakṣa maṃ.
Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ.
Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ.
Oṃ ruru duna. Oṃ jaja yava. Oṃ yaśuk bhyo bhyo bhyo.
Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ.

When this was spoken, all the ten directions were shaken. They trembled, quaked, shuddered, and rumbled, roared, and fell into tremor and quaking; they were thrown into turmoil.

Then they entreated that he enter the samādhi of the consort, and they made this request:

Emaho! You of utmost intelligence,
you cause the world to be shaken.
For those tormented by karma, without freedom,
the Sugata has spoken in his words.
Please bring them supreme happiness.

When they had pleaded thus, the Blessed One entered meditative absorption called the King of Supreme Samādhi, and spoke this:

Oṃ vajra anala kala hūṃ vajra gata praveśa ho.

When he had spoken thus, these world-realms became utterly gentle.

By this, all beings became just as they were before, and went for refuge to the Blessed One, the Great Lord of Death, the Slayer of Death (Yamāntaka).

Then the Blessed One, to gratify the deities with the seal of method and wisdom, spoke this:

Rest in one-pointed absorption,
and let the consort be seated on the left.
When the samādhi of arousal is moist with bliss,
the stirring draws one onto the path of awakening.
The very ground, the cause for generating the Sugata,
is shown at its peak as oṃ and phaṭ.

When he had spoken thus, all the Tathāgatas of the ten directions were gratified by the play of delight.

This is the first chapter, the root chapter of the introduction, from the Noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One declared this for the sake of pacifying activity:

For regions that are most pure white,
one should act with a gratified mind,
and with faith perform the action of gratifying.
So the unsurpassed Victor has fully taught.

On ground that is white and perfectly level,
a maṇḍala with four corners,
with a center and eight spokes,
the skilled one should draw, having traced the lines.

On the white lunar disc,
beginning with one and then three,
in order to gratify the three realms entirely,
one should put it into experience and accomplish it.

In the center is the lord of wisdom.
In the east is the Great Subduer of the Black One.
In the south, the one called Yavati.
In the west, the wrathful one, Dmigs-pa.
In the north, one should place the Subduer of Māras.

At the intermediate points, east-south, south-west, west-north, and north-east, one should place the Ox-Headed One, the Wrathful Life-Cutter, the Purifier, and the Lord, the eight who accomplish activity, in this order.

Above and below, one should place the red ones, visualizing the Rock-Dweller. The crescent and the three paths are likewise included.

At each gate, draw the gate guardians, together with their consorts, in the same form as the wrathful one himself.

Seat the hero in his posture,
attend him with the consort at his left,
arrange the retinue of mantra servants beautifully,
and begin the gratifying activity.

On a cremation-ground ash and bone,
shaped like the form of Jambhala,
one should draw it at the heart.
Write A-ma-pa-la-si-ti, or whatever syllable is desired,
and make it bound by phaṭ and svāhā.

Write the name and purpose as above,
and set it down as appropriate.
Then speak this as well:

Oṃ akro vajra śāntiṃ nāga vajra svāhā.
Oṃ akro teka śāntiṃ bala buṃ.

Reciting this and striking at the heart, all will be gratified and, with a faithful mind, become pacified.

When the pacifying action has thus been completed, one should pacify the malevolent ones of the ten directions, for the action succeeds when none is displeased with oneself.

This is the second chapter, on pacifying everything, from the Noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One declared this for the sake of increasing everything:

For regions made of gold as well,
one should act with a mind of glory and increase,
and with the mind of increasing,
I will explain the supreme maṇḍala.

Make the maṇḍala as before,
and apply the cow-dung powder.
The wise and supreme yogin
should begin to lay out these lines.

On the cord made of gold,
with a mind of glorious increase,
thinking that the disciple will be one of supreme activity,
one should lay out these lines.

The palace is gold with a turquoise summit,
the vajra wall made of gold,
the corners and gates made of iron.
The wise mantra-yogin makes the four lines into eight sections.

The instruction for laying lines from the edge
is to be contemplated in this way and the like.
Sit in the jeweled cross-legged posture,
and in the center invoke the lord of the secret mantra.

In each direction, the supreme gate guardians
should be visualized as before.
Then one generates the male being of one's own mantra.

Oṃ akro teka puṣṭiṃ bala na hūṃ.
Oṃ akro puṣṭiṃ tivata naṃ stvaṃ.

By reciting this, the lord with consort,
and the retinue, each from a seed syllable,
or each by their own supreme generation...

Clear in meditative absorption, together with the mantra,
one should perfect completely, without omission,
all the ritual activities
of invoking the deity to be present, making it firm,
making offerings, paying homage, and the like.

The fruit of generation and accomplishment
is that, relying on the Victor, before long
one attains the self-arisen fruit and the rest,
and the supreme accomplishments are bestowed
from all directions and times, from those who have come.
So the hero, the guide, has rightly taught.

Next, further, it is explained:
having made the maṇḍala as before,
on ground made of earth mixed with gold,
make the supreme form, the image.
Press down the outer part, spreading it out evenly;
within, write Hūṃ puṣṭiṃ a bu ce svāhā at the heart, and recite it.
This is the supreme essence mantra,
taught by the unsurpassed Supreme One.
If one says, "Oṃ vajra puṣṭiṃ āyu vaśaṃ śrī puṣṭiṃ svāhā," everything will increase.

This is the third chapter, on increasing everything, of the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One entered the meditative absorption called Gathering All by One's Own Power, and uttered this inspired declaration.

In realms connected with copper,
those without independence are brought under power,
and, endowed with a gathering mind,
the maṇḍala is to be explained.
On ground of copper or red earth,
like the previous maṇḍalas,
once the ground has been well leveled,
the lines are to be laid out.
It has a center and eight spokes,
fully round, expanding to the rim.
Draw the center with a bow-curve,
and upon it place the supreme lord.
Everything without exception is supremely summoned,
and not even the earth obstructs it.
So the unsurpassed Supreme One has said:
it is to be taught, and one relies on it well.

Furthermore, it is to be explained:
the supreme maṇḍala of mind,
the unsurpassed, true, and definitive path.
The buddhas, awakening, and so forth,
the words and meanings that arise in the text,
if one practices exactly as the unerring word declares,
it is taught that one will accomplish.
When even those are halted,
what need to speak of ordinary beings?
Gathering and drawing in is the path of awakening;
this is for the sake of attaining that state.

Mix white mustard seed, earth from a footprint, or other earth,
the three bloods, and great ash,
and pour it into an amulet box.
Join the two halves of the box together,
bind it with red thread, copper wire, and the like,
wrap it, and place it on top of the maṇḍala.
Burn white mustard seed and copper,
and fumigate the box with the smoke.
When it has been fumigated,
recite the essence mantra of recitation
ten thousand times and more.
If one recites it, buddhas and the rest
are summoned; what need to speak of ordinary beings?
They are certainly summoned.
Oṃ vajra akro mañjuśrī vaśaṃ mahā sarva tila bruṃ.
If it is recited many times,
whatever one has in mind is wholly summoned.
The essence of rock salt mixed with mustard,
and the essence of a mother's hand,
if summoned as before,
the hero has taught that one will summon.
Or else one's own hand will also do.

Thus it was said, and all without exception gathered, just as bees gather on a lake from every direction. What is to be brought under one's power comes under one's power. So spoke the Blessed One, Mañjuśrī, the Lord of Death (Yamāri).

This is the fourth chapter, on empowerment, of the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One, the Great Wrathful Lord of Death (Yama), performed the gathering of the assembly and spoke this, which has the power of its own nature.

The maṇḍala of the wisdom that brings forth
is made just like the previous maṇḍalas.
One's own self is the great wrathful one,
and the consort likewise is his.
From the blessing of the nondual father and mother,
the thread of the lines is made of iron.
That is called the line of activity.
By laying four lines, eight maṇḍalas arise.

The wheel has four spokes, with a rim, and a surrounding circle.
Everywhere it is square, with gateways and a ring of enclosure.
It has the cut corners, adorned with the charnel ground.
Draw it beautifully; it is found nowhere else.
The deities to be relied upon are as before.
By reciting this mantra of generation,
one should generate oneself as like oneself.

Oṃ akrote ka hūṃ a. Hūṃ vajra vetāli rakṣa maṃ. Bhyo bhyo bhyo. Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ. Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ. Bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo.

By the mere speaking of this, all these world-systems were shaken. They were greatly shaken. They were shaken everywhere and greatly. They trembled, trembled greatly, trembled everywhere and greatly. They quaked, quaked greatly, quaked everywhere and greatly. They rocked, rocked greatly, rocked everywhere and greatly. They roared, roared greatly, roared everywhere and greatly. When the center was high, the edges were low; when the edges were high, the center was low. Thus these world-systems were greatly shaken.

Then the Blessed One, whose very nature is the Vajra, spoke these words. Blessed One, we rejoice at the secret mantra you have spoken so powerfully. We request that such power be shown in the world. Blessed One, I wish to make all beings greatly tremble before the one who is wrathful by nature. Then the Blessed One, who gathers himself into the Great Wrathful One, spoke thus:

Oṃ śrī vara yakṣa guhya, sarva takri vajra kāla rūpa māraṇa phaṭ.

When he had spoken this, he subdued all in the world who were mighty and powerful, and said this:

From whatever worlds of the ten directions,
in the nature of reality, where nothing is spoken,
from one's own mind blazing forth in turmoil,
there arise those teachings spoken in the ten directions.
Therefore, generate zeal and strong resolve,
and I shall explain the swift fierce rite.
All the cruel ones, the world and its contents,
turn in an instant to lightning-like ruin.
I shall proclaim this wonder and marvel.

Emaho! From the sky-expanse of the play of the nondual father and mother,
the awakening mind radiates in the ten directions.
The father of the family and likewise the consort
should be constantly meditated upon, and one should become the Tathāgata.
The substances, with the mudrās and mantras,
accomplish whatever result of form or desire is wished.
Make that one to be led out, who is endowed with the ten non-virtues.
With mantras, mudrās, and substances,
with the gau, the supreme lotus,
and the clay smeared by the potter,
with the three bloods and the gorocana:
these are the supreme activity.
Success will surely come about, without fail.
The unsurpassed hero has spoken this truly.
All the cruel ones of the ten directions, without remainder,
will be subdued, without doubt.

This is the fifth chapter, on the fierce rite, of the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One, Mañjuśrī, Slayer of Yama, in order to enjoy the state of spontaneously accomplished wisdom, spoke this inspired utterance.

By nature noble, everywhere wisdom itself,
and likewise free of conceptual thought:
these two are explained as the dharmakāya.
The enjoyment of the Dharma expands for the sake of taming.
To accomplish the aims of beings, bodies arise without remainder.
To tame the māras, the non-Buddhists, and the demons,
having emanated into forms with the major and minor marks,
this was spoken for the sake of cutting down all without remainder.

Make a wheel with eight spokes, bounded by a round rim.
Surround its edges with serpents as the border.
At the center, draw a vajra as the border.
Upon it, place two skull-cups.
In one, draw the form of Yama with six heads.
In the other, draw the form of the Great Mother, the wrathful one with furrowed brow.
Inside, put the enemy's footprint,
scent, and likewise the three bloods,
and the fluid mixed with the great ash and the resin.
Knead these and fashion the form of the enemy,
place it inside and bind it with white thread.
Set it upon the maṇḍala.
Oṃ yamāntaka.

Simply by reciting "Hrīṣṭiṃ Vajrakrodha Yamāntaka Vajrakrodha Phaṭ Phaṭ A," the deity appears.

Father and mother, their bodies a dark blue-black,
their black hair bristling, the locks swept upward.
Their heads are adorned with fresh skulls,
and their bodies with black serpents and cords.
The four feet are set in the posture of stretching and contracting.
The six hands hold the implements:
in the first right, a threatening gesture with the forefinger,
then a rope-snare, an iron hook, and at the last,
a great conch and a trident, radiant, in the left.
Once the form and dress are thus clearly visualized,
take up this melody with earnest effort:

Hūṃ! Fierce king, blood-drinking slayer, Yama,
who commands the three realms, whose three faces are the sign of this,
father and mother, spontaneously accomplished, emanated from the basic space,
for the sake of taming those cruel beings, hard to subdue,
who wander deluded by evil karma, we pray: come forth.

With the seal of the sacred commitment, say "Jaḥ Hūṃ Baṃ Hoḥ, Samaya Stvaṃ," many times. By this the deity will remain steadfastly present.

Arrange the torma offerings of great blood, raging blood, flesh, fat, the great substances, and the like. Upon the maṇḍala, with yourself clearly visualized in meditative absorption, recite this mantra one hundred thousand times:

Oṃ Vajra Hasta Bava Hehadāna Hrīṣṭiṃ Chegemo Mārāya Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ. Chegemo Hasta Bapriti Nirte Sa Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ.

Recite it one hundred thousand times each day, and continue for three days. When these recitations are complete, begin the torma rites: generating, urging, and completing, and inviting the wrathful ones of the ten directions. Then perform all the activities in full, such as inviting them to remain, making them firm, and making them unshakable. When the rites are thus complete, practice the subjugation again and again. If you subjugate in this way, what need is there to speak of enemies and obstructors coming under your power?

Then, further, one should declare this aloud for that purpose, as it was taught:

Oṃ! I am the heart-son
of the Sugatas of the ten directions and three times.
Bless me to cut down without remainder
the māras, the flesh-eating demons, and the misleading spirits.
I am the son of the protector Yama himself.
All aims, without exception,
shall be accomplished through this very means.
In order to subdue all enemies,
may the one who wields the vajra of activity bring it about.

Saying this and striking with the mantra is called the supreme king of activities.

As for the times and the number of days: one thousand and one hundred on a single day; at midnight, one hundred and one; at dawn, one session of one hundred and one; at dusk, one hundred and one. In this way, for three days, complete the full count of recitations. Form the seal and strike the effigy. If it is done for the sake of a fish, the spirit will not devour it.

Oṃ Māraṇa Khāda Sarva Hrīṣṭiṃ Yaman Hūṃ Hūṃ. Trekhāda Paraṇa Pala Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ Svāhā.

Form the seal of the single-pointed vajra, and strike the form of the enemy.

Oṃ Vajra Hūṃ Khaṃ Spharaṇa Phaṭ. Hūṃ Āveśaya. Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ A.

Again, with the preceding seal, say: Oṃ Vajra Krodha Nīla Tantra Hūṃ Hūṃ. Hrīṣṭiṃ Kṛtana Na. Hūṃ Hrīṣṭiṃ Vikṛtana Nan Nan. Then confer the empowerment with your own hand.

Again form the seal, and recite this mantra many times as well:

Oṃ Vajra Caṇḍa Hrīṣṭiṃ Vajra Stiraṃ. Khahi Hūṃ Hūṃ. Chegemo, bring under my power! Hril Hril. Say this many times.

Strike with the seal of the vajra net. Again, form the seal and strike with this mantra:

Oṃ Vajra Kaṅka Makala Yana Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ A.

Recite it one hundred thousand times and strike with the seal of the five-pronged vajra. Again, form the seal and strike with this mantra:

Oṃ Vajra Aṅkuśa Tretha Stiraṃ Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ Chegemo Māraya Jaḥ Hūṃ.

With this, bring the enemy under your power, and say "Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ" many times. Form the seal of the raised vajra, and gather them under your power.

Again, form the seal and strike with this mantra:

Oṃ Hūṃ Hūṃ Phaṭ Phaṭ, Gather, Gather, Rang Rang, Yaṃ Yaṃ, Raṃ Raṃ, Hriṃ Hriṃ, Duba Bhyo Hūṃ Phaṭ, Chegemo Dun Bhyo.

Recite this, and strike with the seal of the khaṭvāṅga. In this way, having accomplished these rites together with the meditative absorption that brings them to completion, one should do the recitation; then whatever rite one performs, all will certainly come under one's power. Thus the Blessed One declared.

This concludes the sixth chapter, on gathering power over wicked mantras, from the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Rites.

Then once more the Blessed One, the Slayer of Yama, the Blessed One whose activity pervades all things, spoke this means of accomplishment, drawn forth from the vajra of body, speech, and mind.

To shatter the limbs of the five aggregates,
To cut the three poisons off at the root,
And to accomplish the fruit of victory,
I shall now explain the wrathful rites.

The first rites are expansion and concealment,
Summoning, entrusting, binding, and releasing.
All the wicked ones who are to be subdued
Will be dealt with by means of this activity.

First, the method for seeking out the corpse
Is to seek it with six qualities:
The tigress's pounce upon her prey,
The lion's rearing upon the snow,
The crow and the vulture's rush at their quarry,
The eagle's swoop upon its prey,
The great bear's way of dreaming,
And the crow's way of scorching the dry wood.
With these one should seek the heap of the corpse.

If it lies on a mountain, seek it by rearing up.
If on a slope, seek it by leaping.
If on a ridge, seek it by settling down.
If in a hollow, seek it by swooping down.
If among rocks, seek it by dreaming.
If in a forest, seek it by scorching.

If the person is of royal caste, use the lion's bearing.
If a brahmin, use the tigress's bearing.
If of the merchant caste, use the eagle's bearing.
If a commoner, act as the bear.
If a eunuch, act as the monkey.
If an outcaste, use the bearing of the crow and the vulture.
Thus the manner of seeking the corpse
Is carried out with these six qualities.

When the corpse has been examined and brought,
Perform the rite of Yama, the Lord of Death.
With the manner of the ten wrathful ones,
Circle all around the corpse,
And place it in the center of the great maṇḍala.
Having done the placing in this way,
Point the head to the southwest,
And the feet to the northeast.
The right hand lies to the south,
The left hand to the west,
The right foot to the east,
The left foot to the north.
Having laid it out on its back in this way,
Now the ritual daggers are to be driven.

Drive them into the eyes, the ears, the nose, and the tongue,
Both hands and both feet, and the secret organ,
Likewise the throat and the heart,
The navel, the knees, and the two shoulders,
Likewise the elbows and the two ankles,
The crown, likewise the top of the head,
The hips, and likewise the two armpits,
And the forehead.
Those daggers are to be well examined and become familiar
As the bodies of the deities.
The abiding in one's own nature, the arrival,
The meditation as samādhi,
And the arrangement of the reflected images within: these are the three.
Like butter melting into sand scorched by heat,
Know that they dissolve without duality.
The deities shown above
Are the four consciousnesses and the four sense faculties,
And the objects that arise from these;
Know these eight to abide in the same state.
This is renowned throughout all the gateways.
Because method and wisdom are joined,
The wrathful ones above and below arise from this.
The body, speech, and mind of all of them
Are the three mothers, and they are myself.
The father pervades all things,
The mother gathers all things,
And the one who performs the activity is my very self.
Pervading all the aggregates,
The host of deities, delighted, makes the offering.
All six classes of beings appear without remainder.
When the rites have thus been completed,
Take the pledge for the number of days.
The great yogin who desires to attain siddhi
Makes the meditative absorption clear.
Having done this, it is said that humans and all others
Will come under one's power.
What need is there to speak of enemies and obstructors?

The one who desires to accomplish the wrathful activity
Writes the enemy's name on a slip of paper
And places it inside the mouth of the vase.
Seal it with the vajra seal of the crossed vajra.
Press it down with the mudrā of Heruka.
Strike fiercely with white mustard seeds, which are the king of such substances.
Pour in fiercely the gathered seal-substance.
For four days strike fiercely,
Never interrupting the mantra and the mudrā.
Spread out the samaya substances and offerings abundantly.
Practice the meditative absorption of the yoga fiercely.
If one becomes distracted, obstacles will arise.
The wrathful one declared that one must never allow distraction.
By this, the fruit of the activity too
Becomes utterly inexhaustible:
Flying in the sky, entering the earth,
And not sinking in water, one possesses the higher knowledges.
Thus it was spoken.

This is the seventh chapter, on striking with the peg of the evil mantra, from the practice of raising a corpse, in the Secret Tantra of the Wheel of Four, from the Great King of Tantras.

Then the Blessed One Mañjuśrī, who is Yama himself, spoke this, the spontaneously accomplished by its own nature.

Generate the maṇḍala of coiling wisdom, and above it,
Mark the fine lines of the clear sun of wisdom.
Draw the circular rim and the serpent noose.
Surround the platform, the directions and the intermediate directions with pegs.
In the maṇḍala drawn in this way, arrange as follows.
Oṃ is placed at the central hub.
In the east Hrī, in the south Stāṃ,
In the west Hūṃ, in the north Ha.
In the northeast, the syllable Ja;
In the southeast Trī, in the southwest Me,
And in the northwest Ā, firmly established.
Having set out these supporting syllables,
Meditate in the center as follows:
Yama, whose body is dark red and black,
Has three heads and six hands.
The heads are adorned with a garland of skulls.
The right face is dark purple-black, the left is green,
And the central face matches the body.
The body is adorned with a garland of skulls.
He abides on four legs, stretching and bending,
Embracing the body of the father.
The left side abides as above.
Oṃ amṛta-ṭaka sarva amṛta-krota hūṃ phaṭ.
Oṃ amṛta-kroṭa hūṃ phaṭ.
Thus generate the father and mother clearly,
Seated upon a lotus seat.
The sequence of the retinue and so forth
Follows the stages of the generation above.
Constantly recite the mantra of approach,
Neither harshly, nor slackly, nor weakly,
Meditating the absorption with clarity.
In the absorption that pacifies and urges on,
At the very center of the hub of Mount Meru,
From the firmly established lower ground,
Bestow the empowerment of the vajra of life.
Draw the life of the harmful beings of the ten directions,
And all the harmful ones without remainder will be summoned.
Constantly recite this essence of life:
Oṃ samaya mañjuśrī mutra ako āyu phala siti nibruṃ a.
By this, having obtained the empowerment of life,
One becomes equal to the body of a buddha,
And until the eon is destroyed
Remains as though five years old.
Then this place of urging was spoken.

Emaho! This drop, the king of wisdom,
Gathered from all the ten directions,
Has arisen as a great and wondrous secret.
The six classes of beings in saṃsāra,
The essence spontaneously accomplished from the beginning,
All phenomena without remainder, entire,
The dharmakāya, or the dharmadhātu,
The ultimate word and the directly evident,
Pervading all things and all signs,
Is sorrow-free great compassion.
Subtle, it is the nature of mind,
Dispelling the darkness of delusion,
Free from every stain of affliction.
Fully awakened, it is nirvāṇa.
Yama is the nature of compassion,
The unchanging nature of the vajra of life.
Having said this, all the Sugatas of the ten directions and three times spoke the following from the mouth of the fierce one.

Emaho! The worlds of the ten directions are empty from the beginning.
All the Sugatas are spontaneously accomplished from the beginning.
The ten-direction thousandfold realms, perfectly complete in the wisdom that has abandoned the two extremes,
Are adorned together with the worlds.
If one bestows empowerment through method and wisdom,
Māras, rākṣasas and misleading spirits have their lives gathered in.
By that permission to empower, bestow the blessing as well.
Draw life from the realm of the gandharvas in the east.
Oṃ vajra-kula e sva śvara na ha ha ha ho ho hūṃ hūṃ.

Thus, together with melodious song, all the Sugatas who are accomplished from the vajra family bestowed the empowerment of long life upon the protector Yama, the Lord of Death.

Then, in order to bestow the empowerment of long life of the jewel family, this was spoken.

Emaho! Lord of all who hold the jewel,
Sovereign of the world, the one who empowers,
Blessed to pervade as the supreme chief,
Having obtained the long life of the unchanging family,
Draw life from the southern realm of Yama.
Oṃ ratna-kula āyu he he ho ho hūṃ.
By the empowerment of the delighted jewel,
May the special blessing be obtained.

Then the empowerment of long life of the lotus family was also spoken.

Emaho! The assembly of wrathful, fierce, and mighty ones,
Sovereign of the lotus family,
Spontaneously accomplished from non-appearance,
Through the empowerment bestowed by Vajradhara,
May I obtain the empowerment of long life of the subduer of nāgas.
Padma-kula āyu he he ho ho hūṃ.
The empowerment of long life, spontaneously accomplished,
May the unobstructed, sublime one be attained.

Then the empowerment of long life of the action family was uttered.

Emaho! Nature free of any sign,
Endowed with the five wisdoms, chief of enlightened activity,
The action family, which is non-dual,
By empowering all actions,
Draw life from yakṣas and malevolent spirits,
May the empowerment subduing yakṣas and obstructors be obtained.
Oṃ karma-kula āyu he he ho ho hūṃ.

By this utterance everything became the empowerment of long life itself, and this solemn utterance was spoken:

By the compassion of the four immeasurables,
May the enemies, the afflictions, be pacified.

Thus the empowerment of long life was bestowed upon all the Sugatas of the ten directions and three times.

This is the eighth chapter, the chapter on the accomplishment of long life of Mañjuśrī, from the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One, who is the very self of Yama, arose from the body, speech, and mind of Antakṛt, the Ender, himself.

This enlightened activity of Yama, the action of death:
It causes intoxication, dizziness,
Mental agitation, and the vomiting of blood.
Six kinds of misleading rites are taught.

The maṇḍala of the Ender who leads astray
Is a twelve-spoked wheel.
Draw it upon the cloth of a hungry ghost,
Upon a three-tiered frame,
Surrounded all around by the vowels as syllables.
Having subdued with the mantra of hriṣṭi,
Place a skull upon the palm of the hand.
Then fill it with the mantra.
Ya ma na te ra ca, the assembly.
Sa is the source, the basis of the elements.
Fire is the burning of all.
Generate yourself as Yama, the Ender, in body,
And meditate the consort likewise there,
So that all the cruel ones of the ten directions
Are made utterly and completely fierce, without remainder.
Without erring in the essence of the recitation,
Having wholly abandoned sound and conditioned activity,
In a pleasant, delightful, and pure place,
With glaring eyes and an angry mind,
Having abandoned the mind that accompanies sound,
From sunrise until sunset,
It is taught to be done continuously and at set times.
In the intervals, perform the activity of urging,
And speak out well the actions of entrusting.

Then the Blessed One made the entire assembly of the wrathful Yama non-dual with the venerable consort, and drew forth this recitation mantra from body, speech, and mind.

Oṃ hriṣṭri pikṛtāna na. Hūṃ hūṃ pana anudabhava. Sarva-dharma cacārya atibaṃ. Oṃ laṃ yaṃ aṃ. Vajra-bodhi-tathāgata-krodheśvari. Abhita-vajra-krodheśvari. He he hūṃ hūṃ.

By reciting this mantra well,
Great in color and great in body,
The expanse unbroken, all of it is space,
All luminous wisdom is like space.
Become skilled in the scriptural transmission of the mantra of the ultimate.
All its applications satisfy and delight;
The mantra of gathering power is joined with fierce activity.
It abides in the mantra and mudrā of the non-apprehending chief,
And the liberating and ultimate activity is taught to abide there.
Be endowed with these stages of meditative absorption:
The absorption of the wrathful Tathāgata,
And the absorption of mastery over illusion,

the absorption of the means that joins one to the great station; the absorption endowed with the miraculous display of subsequent instruction; the absorption in which compassion liberates aversion; the absorption in which wisdom liberates attachment; the absorption in which primordial wisdom liberates delusion; the absorption in which good qualities crush pride; and the absorption in which effortless diligence crushes envy.

The mantras that subdue these are as follows. Prajñā-kula, Jñāna-kula, Dhāka-kula, Guṇa-kula, Vīrya-kula, Bhūta-kula, Vajra-kula, Padma-kula, Karma-kula, Ratna-kula, Sarva-tathāgata-ho.

Having spoken this, he declared the following.

Just as with fire and its light,
Though bees may gather in the light,
The heat of the flame is in the light itself,
And by that light the bees are burned.
So too all the stains of fault,
The māras and the non-Buddhists, the misleaders,
The hostile foes and the obstructing spirits,
Are oppressed and suppressed by wisdom and skillful means;
They are like the flame and the bees.

Even those who are discordant and different,
The noble Mañjuśrī, the Lord of Death himself,
Frees them without entanglement.
The unborn wisdom is the sword.
Having cut through the suffering of the afflictions,
Whether the cause be fitting or unfitting,
Whether a cause or not a cause,
Afflicted beings are made to dwell in the higher realms.
In that field of liberation, as it is called,
Act upon them fiercely in just that way.
Where family and years are in accord,
To act so is a fault; know all of this fully.

Those who strive at actions and tasks
Awaken their own aim through the mudrā of experience.
The sign of this will not be difficult:
On the underside of a garment for a person,
Draw with gorocana;
Then the secret mantra that follows,
And whatever is to be done, draw it in expanded form,
And bind it with the saliva of blood.
Draw the essence of the six Sages,
And recite this secret mantra fiercely.

Oṃ hviṣṭṛ krodha vikṛta, hriṣṭṛ krodhi mārata, prasaṅ hetebamukā, he haṅ he haṅ, kāla rūpa hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ a.

By proclaiming the sound of this speech,
Enemies, obstructers, non-Buddhists,
Māras and all the rākṣasas
Are to be oppressed and suppressed fiercely.
Those beings on the hostile side,
For the sake of taming them,
One should meditate in a wrathful form,
And this natural accomplishment, which liberates all, is taught.

Oṃ pramārtena, namo vajra vajra kimonata, ahaṅ prakhuma khummo musti svāhā.

By speaking so, by nature they come under one's power.
The māras are angry and fierce,
The rākṣasas are terrifying and wild,
The non-Buddhists and misleaders come to dispute.
In order to tame these,
This supreme activity is undertaken.

Draw the maṇḍala as before.
In the central palace, at the center,
Draw the essence that subdues the māras.
On the spokes of the eastern wheel,
Draw the essence that gathers the gandharvas under power.
On the wheel of the southern direction,
Draw the essence that liberates the non-Buddhists.
On the wheel of the western direction,
Draw the essence that cuts down the nāgas.
On the wheel of the northern direction,
Draw the essence that gathers the hosts of yakṣas under power.

Hūṃ vighnān, hūṃ rakṣanān, oṃ tīrthikān, oṃ mārannān.

At the center of the maṇḍala of the intermediate directions,
Draw the essence that suppresses the obstructers of the intermediate directions.

Hūṃ dha hūṃ pāḥ hūṃ lā, hu svā.

On the four-sided cutting-knife shapes,
Draw fresh skulls.
Set a garland of skulls around the rim,
And fill the outer surface entirely with serpents.

When the maṇḍala has been completed in this way,
Draw all the forms of those who cause harm
In the shape of figures on a potter's clay vessel.

Place it in the center. Having bound it with a red cord, make the one-pointed mudrā, and recite this secret mantra ten thousand times.

Oṃ pramata namo hasra vajra jaki mona dha ahaṃ prakhuma mo tha tha svāhā. Namo dogi kha dha mu prapa tha byitha. Uste ninan sarva tata na phaṭ.

With that mudrā, strike. If you recite for three nights, the obstructers and the misleading spirits are gathered under power.

Furthermore, in the same way, the wrathful ones who dwell there, white and red and yellow, dark purple, greenish black, and dark brown, each in his own garb, in fierce forms. The Protector, the Black Lord of Death (Yama), crushes and suppresses the obstructers and misleading spirits. Strike this into the fierce face.

Oṃ che ge mo kha ram khāhi. Oṃ hriṣṭṛ che ge mo kha ram khāhi. Oṃ kālarūpa che ge mo kha ram khāhi. Hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ a.

Recite for the span of three days and nights. Then, joining the three mudrās, crush and suppress again and again. With that mudrā and this secret mantra, strike a thousand and one times.

Oṃ hriṣṭṛ vajra yaya na parṇa suputta hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ a.

Action, substance, mantra, and mudrā, with diligence and without distraction, a hundred thousand times or as many as one can, again and again, do earnestly.

Thus the Blessed One, the King Mañjuśrī Bhairava (Yamāntaka), fully declared.

This is the ninth chapter, "Suppression of the Misleading Spirits by the Ender," from the noble Tantra of the Secret Wheel of the Four Actions.

Then the Blessed One, the very self of Yama, drew forth from this Ender's own body, speech, and mind the qualities and the activity.

For this activity of the Ender of yakṣas, draw the maṇḍala as before, and draw the essence of recitation.

Ya: generating. Me: burning. To: compassion, clinging to Ru-la. Ñja: the arising one, the secret of the father. Yo: the origin; ta: gathering.

The very self is the body of the Ender of actions. From the play of father and mother without duality, rays of light of the awakening mind radiate. With a smile, offer them to the object.

To the unsurpassed awakening of the buddhas, just as they made offerings and acted, so too, in order to fully liberate beings, may the absorption gather, like space.

When this was spoken, all the malevolent ones of the ten directions were struck with bewilderment and stupor, intoxicated, like a man turned into a corpse.

Then from this very earnest activity, the body, speech, and mind, qualities and activity were drawn forth.

The subduer of all the malevolent,
The great wrathful one with the sound Hūṃ,
The activity-body, Ender of all actions.

All yakṣas who are filled with hatred
And intend to create obstacles:
To overpower them,
The body is great black in color.
The hair, dark brown, coils upward.
He wears a crown of three tiers of skulls.
In his right hand, a great field, and in his left, a bhanda.
Three eyes, fangs bared, the legs stretched and drawn in.
The hostile obstructers and hateful enemies,
All of them gathered under power: the body of supreme activity.
Bearing a hideous appearance, with the vigor of arrogance,
He has made the great field and the abyss his ornaments.
Gathering aversion under power, he wears a tiger-skin skirt.
Gathering the afflictions under power, he wears a fresh elephant hide.
This holy wrathful king who leads and subdues the malevolent,
Hard to tame, the beings of the evil final age:
Gathering the afflictions under power, he displays strength in the glorious face.
With compassion he places all beings into the expanse.

Chief of the wrathful ones, holding the force of hatred,
Subduer of the enemies and obstructers who have become malevolent,
Whose body is always the three poisons, pride and the rest,
Bring everything to completion from within the state of wisdom.

Oṃ vajra hriṣṭṛ vikṛtānan. Tathāgata yama raca hūṃ phaṭ a.

Together with this mantra, meditate on yourself as the body of the Ender of actions, entrust the activity, and recite fiercely the essence of recitation that suppresses. At that time, if performing the fire offering, begin the activity. The hearth is shaped like the letter E.

The hearth has three tiers, stacked, with a mouth that holds the offering.
On its surface let a garland of flames be cast.
On the vajra fence around the mouth
Is a garland of skulls on the rim.
It is said to be fire, the holder of what is to be burned.
Its color is intensely black.
In the hand are a rope with a loop, a garland of bared teeth,
And a bundle of rolled cloth.
As is proper, invite, seat, and praise.
Empowerments and the gathering of offerings, and the departure of the deities,
Perform each as is fitting.
Below the two, the body of the Mother, of intrinsic nature,
Invite her, nondual, and entrust her to remain.
When the burning activity has been taken up,
Entrusting and urging should also be done well.
The substances are poison, salt,
Mustard oil, honey, and black mustard seed,
Black guggul and the like;
Iron-like substances are especially praised.
Meditate on yourself as the body of the deity,
And with one-pointed concentration recite fiercely
This mantra, blessed by the maṇḍala:
Oṃ hūṃ ya khaṃ metra hamukha hriṣṭṛ yama raca phaṭ hūṃ.
Form the mudrā of subjugation, form the mudrā of binding.
Circling the maṇḍala, recite the secret mantra.
Sit yourself in the western direction,
Meditate on yourself as the body of the Ender of actions,
And if you recite the secret mantra neither slackly nor too fiercely,
Success comes swiftly.
Those who go mad, are stupefied, fall helpless,
Or faint away and are reduced to ashes:
It is not taught that these will certainly fail to be accomplished.
Thus spoke the Blessed One, the wrathful Amoghasiddhi.

This is the tenth chapter, on subduing the yakṣa Ender, from the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities.

Then once more, Mañjuśrī, the Great Slayer of Yama, brought forth this Ender from his body, speech, and mind.

This activity of the rākṣasa Ender
Is taught to be performed through meditating on the maṇḍala.
Ya is the cause, ta is the condition,
Yo is the urging of all,
Ni ni is the meaning of gathering.
That which is called Ri, the dense and solid,
Is gathered into Ya and dissolves into Kṣe.
The body called "Binding of the self"
Has three heads and six arms:
Right white, left red, the middle yellow-black.
The six arms hold implements:
On the right, the noose of Vasuta,
Next a clear one, and last an iron hook.
On the left, first a sea-monster, a makara, in the middle,
And last a vajra net.
The upper body is draped in a fresh elephant hide,
The lower body in a tiger-skin skirt.
The great field and the good fortune adorn the body.
Besides these, all the supreme ornaments of the charnel ground
Are completely perfected on the body.
To urge him on, take up this melody:
Indestructible vajra, lord of dance,
Vajra secret Lord of Death,
King of activity, the accomplishment of rites.
Oṃ, Aṃ, and Hūṃ:
Visualize Oṃ at the forehead,
Aṃ upon the tongue,
And Hūṃ at the heart itself.
From these rays of light pour out,
And my body becomes like space.
By uttering Phaṭ,
The world realms are covered with light.
This is not burning;
It is the blazing of mind's wisdom.
What is the emptiness of one
Is the emptiness of all.
Just as images appearing in the sky
Arise from space itself,
So too the emission and gathering of mantra
Arise from mind in space,
And consciousness is gathered into the state of emptiness.
Meditate on yourself as the truth body,
Create abundant emission and gathering of hatred,
And recite the generating mantra fiercely:
Oṃ mahā daṃṣṭo ṭaka pera ara neca naka ta khai che ge mola dus.
It is also said that the mantras come from above, and that if one expands upon them and performs the rite, no spirit will fail to be seized. So spoke the wrathful king, the Lord of Death.

This is the eleventh chapter, on the method of subduing the nāga Ender, from the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities.

Then once more, the Great Wrathful One, the Slayer of Yama, brought forth this Ender from his body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity.

For the activity of Yama Ender, visualize a maṇḍala just like the previous one. Also write this essence of recitation: Yā, the Arisen One, burn with kṣe; yā is "completely," tsa is "dry up," ni means "draw out," ra means "slay," and ma means to gather back what has been generated.

Oneself is the body of Yama Ender. The body is dark green, with one face and two hands, adorned with a half-garland of skulls. The hair of the head is black as soot, the topknot coiled upward. The right hand brandishes a staff topped with a sea monster; the left hand holds a great field-devourer. The upper body is covered with a fresh elephant hide, the lower body wears a tiger-skin skirt. He is seated amid the fire of a charnel ground, and the consort is to be meditated upon as just like him.

The absorption of recitation is like fire, and the recitation is like wind, stirring and moving. On the tongue, upon a sun disc, place the essence of the recitation above. The final syllable, together with its vowel, forms the mantra garland of Hrīṣṭrī. Visualize it radiating outward and summoning the consciousness, then gathering back and dissolving into Yama himself. All these radiations and gatherings in the recitation are applied also to the rites explained above; so it is said.

Then the Blessed One, impelled by the wrathful Lord of Death, spoke this:

Oṃ. Yama, who terrifies all through karma,
The gatherer of all under his power, Yama Ender, in body,
One face, two hands, the body colored green,
His two feet trample the nāga king in a dancing stance.
His body adorned with a thousand black snakes
Subdues the obstructors and ever brings death.
His body adorned with a half-garland of skulls
Is the sign of compassion for beings, looking in one direction.
The hair of his head coiled upward
Is the sign of gathering all three realms of existence under his power.
His right hand bearing the staff of the sea monster
Is the sign of freeing from enemies and great terrors.
His left hand bearing the field-staff
Sets beings on the path beyond sorrow through compassion.
The fresh elephant hide adorning his body
Is the sign of purifying the five poisons in their own place.
The tiger-skin adorning his body
Is the sign that the three poisons are slain in their place, and the body is the dharmakāya.
Though unborn and unmoved by karma,
He descends at the time for performing wrathful activity.

Oṃ hrīṣṭrī yama ra tsa sarva māraya nanja samaya. Reciting this, and performing the rite with the absorption of recitation joined with wrath, no spirit will fail to be seized. These rites are not accomplished merely because one is fit for them; if one does not become familiar with them again and again and does not practice earnestly, they will not be accomplished immediately, even in the slightest.

This is the twelfth chapter, on subduing through Yama Ender, from the noble Secret Tantra of the Wheel of the Four Activities.

Then once more, the accomplishment of the minor activities was brought forth from the body, speech, mind, qualities, and activity of this very same one.

On a maṇḍala like the moon,
Either a lotus or a wheel, whichever is suitable,
Or else on a jeweled net,
The openings of the net are to be settled in place.
Looking inward at a jeweled peg,
Draw or sculpt it there.
Finally, encircle it with a serpent noose.
In the center of that maṇḍala
Dig a pit a cubit deep,
Join a lid with an opening, and inside
Pour white mustard seeds and perform the recitation.
Without being distracted from the signs, through radiating and gathering,
Accomplish it without interruption.

Oṃ vajra kāla dudukhala pramarta na hūṃ phaṭ, slekha slekha phaṭ phaṭ. Reciting this, and meditating on oneself as Yamāntaka, if one recites the mantra to the full extent of one's power, accomplishment is certain. This is the accomplishment of the king of white mustard seeds.

Then the wrathful ones of the retinue and others addressed the Blessed One, the Slayer of Yama, with these words:

Emao! From the expanse there arose, and those who move in the sky and those who rule the earth, three together, we accept this song of exhortation.
Glory of the mother goddesses, endowed with the sky of wisdom,
Whose activity blazes with splendor,

Glorious one, whose hand-gesture is scented with blood!
Mother goddess, you are the sovereign of all, who race across eighty thousand leagues.
Bearing the fearsome aspect of a woman's body,
From your mouth blazes fire that dries the depths of the ocean;
From your eyes drips fat that crushes Mount Meru to dust.
In a mere instant you gather the thousandfold world-system under your power.
Even the eight great gods of the world tremble and quake.
Mighty Chegemo, you bring all under your power.
In the form of a woman, the time has come.
Mighty Chegemo, oṃ trag rakṣa, hri ṣṭṛ ya ma mam nan.
Thus the mother goddesses of the expanse are exhorted.

Dwelling in the vast, measureless depths of the sky,
The host that moves through the realm of space
Brings all the three realms under its power.
Like an iron speckled bird,
You are indeed the supreme among the mother goddesses.
Mouth ablaze, sovereign of a thousand,
Mistress who commands all the fearsome ones,
Subduer of the three existences,
Your gaze spans the heights like the sky.
Going and abiding, you are swifter than lightning.
By beating your right wing,
You crush māras and rākṣasas to dust.
By beating your left wing,
You bring enemies, obstructers, and spirits under your power.
The time has come for those who keep the sacred pledge.
Oṃ ma ra trag rakṣa, tri yo ya ma ra tsa ka ka ru ba hri ṣṭṛ dza.
Thus the host of garuḍas is exhorted.

Yamana, the accomplished women!
Some hold a noose of cord in the hand,
Some carry a garland of skulls,
Some lead the little ones of the field,
Some carry fire and dry up the ocean,
Some seize the one who hooks and summons, wasting him away,
Some hold a black serpent as a snare,
Some summon and lead forth messengers.
When the mantra-holder calls and torments,
The time of the pledge has come: samaya!
You are drawn up from the heart of those who think hatred.
The time has come for the host of the loving.
Oṃ ka ha trag rakṣa, ratna kala hriṣṭṛṃ svāhā.
Thus the host of the treasure-lords is invited and exhorted.

Then the Blessed One, the Slayer of Yama, spoke these words: "In this wheel of the four activities, the king of tantras, in the later time, when any yogin performs the activity of accomplishment, I too will not waver from my sacred commitment. The wrathful ones and wrathful goddesses of my retinue, and others, will also carry out the accomplishment according to my sacred commitment. In the final age, when this holy Dharma is dedicated to the person of the yogin and in similar ways, the pledge will arise." This he undertook by his own word. Then the retinue, delighted that the Blessed One, the king of the wrathful ones, Yama's Slayer, had promised to appear in the final age, rejoiced and praised him highly.

This is the thirteenth chapter, on the concluding exhortation and the granting of permission, from the noble secret tantra, the Wheel of the Four Activities. The root tantra of the great secret, the noble Wheel of the Four Activities, is complete.

Then the wrathful ones, wrathful goddesses, and other members of the retinue, in unison, addressed the Blessed One, the king of the wrathful ones, with these words:

Emao! Blessed One, chief and king of the wrathful,
Concerning this tantra of the wheel of the four activities,
Regarding the teaching of its wonders and marvels,
We who have doubts
Beseech you, by the very essence of the Sugata's speech,
To explain the points of our questions.
What is meant by "noble"?
What is meant by "four activities"?
What is meant by "wheel"?
What is meant by "secret"?
What is meant by "tantra"?
Arising from the utterly pure expanse,
Please explain the points of our questions.

Then the Blessed One, who acts fiercely toward the cruel, brought forth his speech in the voice of Brahmā and spoke thus to the retinue:

Members of the family retinue, in asking these questions,
Your questions on these points are excellent.
What is taught as "noble"
Is more exalted than all cruelty without exception.
It is the source from which wisdom beings arise;
No example can illustrate it.
And what is known as "the four activities" also...

Among these, action is of two kinds:
skillful means and wisdom, the subduing and the empowering.
The three bodies' activity is the subduing.
That which is joined as means with means,
when joined with wisdom, is called the Mother.
The body of Dharma and the body of enjoyment
are renowned as the action of subduing and empowering.

Now, as for what is called "the four,"
they are pacifying, enriching, empowering, and the wrathful.
The meaning of the word "pacifying" is this:
in the meditative absorption of loving-kindness, in stages,
light radiates and gathers, white and shining.
It pleases all beings,
and it pacifies all that is hostile.
Therefore it is called pacifying.

Enriching is golden yellow in color.
In absorption, emanations spread out in great multitudes.
They work for the benefit of beings in the ten directions,
and they invite all the buddhas
who dwell on the grounds of the aeon.
They are made to abide in the pores of my body.
Entering everywhere and increasing,
life, power, splendor, and the rest,
all are increased, and so it is called enriching.

Now the meaning of the word "empowering" is this:
from all the worlds of the ten directions,
everything that is held in my mind,
through the special emanation of Father and Mother,
all that is desired is gathered under one's power.
By meditating on actions and every deed
and on oneself in the body of the deity,
what is to be gathered will certainly come together.

As for the wrathful activity,
Yama, the Slayer, and the Slayer's Lady,
Father and Mother in their special form, like a cloud,
act as if covering the sky.
From the special awakening that is nondual,
light rays radiate and gather, like clouds,
filling and pervading the whole sky,
and are covered over by wrathful emanations.
Having crushed the world to dust,
they subdue every cruel one without exception,
and then gather them back and absorb them into the body of Father and Mother.
In this way, down to the size of a mustard seed,
everything is filled completely.
Wherever the target may dwell,
seek it out, and then summon it again, and so forth.
Without saying "this one" and "that one,"
one thinks of the whole of saṃsāra as completely cast out,
and one imagines the wrathful activity accomplished.

As for what is taught as "wheel":
what does not turn, in order to turn, sends out sharp points.
The hub, the wheel, is cut by the points.
Therefore it is known as "wheel."

As for what is known as "secret":
it is the root, not shown to everyone.
Since it is not common to all,
therefore it is called secret.

As for what is called "tantra":
it is designated so because it is complete and interconnected,
and because it accomplishes what is needed for a continuous thread.
Therefore it is explained as "tantra."

Then once again they addressed the Blessed One as follows:

For four days, four actions
have been taught and set forth with certainty.
On what object should one meditate?
How should one proceed for pacifying?
How should the mantras be recited?
The activities have been definitively taught.
How is it taught for enriching?
What is the recitation of the mantras like?
How should one meditate for empowering?
What is the recitation of the mantras like?
For what is taught as wrathful action,
how should the deity be meditated upon?
What are the mantras to be recited?
By these four activities that are taught,
what kind of action is accomplished?
What are the foundation or the place like?
How are these to be drawn?
Please teach us the oral instruction
on what has been definitively taught.

Then the Blessed One, the Subduer of the Wrathful, spoke these words:

The deities one meditates upon are white in color,
and the Mother likewise is the same.
The retinues of the ten directions are joined to their families.
Meditating clearly on oneself in the form of Yamāntaka,
with the body color vividly visualized,
recite this mantra with delight.

Ya mar tsa sa to me ya, che ge mo ba lu ka shiṃ tāṃ ku ru svāhā. Ya me to run yo ta ya, che ge mo kṣha ra tsa shāntiṃ ku ru svāhā. Ya ta yo ni ri ya kṣhe ya, che ge mo pa la mu sti shāntiṃ ku ru svāhā. Yakṣhe ya tsa ni ra ma ya, che ge mo ma ra ya shāntiṃ ku ru svāhā.

Neither too intense, nor too slack, nor too weak,
perform the practice joined with meditative absorption.

Apply it in due order, day by day, and without doubt it will be accomplished. The activity is certain to be fulfilled. Meditate on the body color as yellow. The Mother likewise is the same as this. Then apply the later stages in order.

Abiding in a meditative absorption like gold, with emanation and reabsorption like the awakening mind, accomplish the aims of beings throughout the ten directions without exception. Then contemplate that one's own aggregates are completely whole, and that one's life and enjoyments are increasing. At that time recite this mantra:

Ya mar tsa sa to me ya, che ge mo bra ma ya, puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā. Ya me to ru na yo ta ya, che ge mo kakṣa puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā. Ya ta yo ni ra yakṣe ya, che ge mo śik sa sti puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā. Yakṣe ya tsa ni ra ma ya, che ge mo śik mā ra ya buṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā.

At that time, having been endowed with the power of the meditative absorption of self-awareness, if one recites that mantra, it will be accomplished, without doubt.

In order to bring all under one's power, the deity also has a body color like copper, and the Mother is likewise visualized as the same. Generating the deities as the scripture prescribes, this is the recitation that brings about the final result.

Ya mar tsa sa to me ya, che ge mo hūṃ hūṃ va śaṃ kuru svāhā. Ya me to ru na yo ta ya, che ge mo hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā. Ya ta yo ni ra yakṣe ya, che ge mo hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ, kāla rūpa svāhā. Yakṣe ya tsa ni ra ma ya, che ge mo hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ, kāla rūpa hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ.

If one performs the recitation of this mantra, even all the unsurpassed buddhas are said to be gathered, without doubt.

The deity has a body color like iron, deep blue, utterly wrathful, naked, with a single topknot, terrifying. Having meditated on subduing the unruly, recite this mantra fiercely:

Ya mar tsa sa to me ya, che ge mo amukaṃ bra ma ya ni hūṃ phaṭ. Ya me to ru na yo ta ya, che ge mo amukaṃ mura tsa ya hūṃ phaṭ. Ya ta yo ni ra yakṣe ya, che ge mo amukaṃ rakta tsa ra hūṃ phaṭ. Yakṣe ya tsa ni ra ma ya, che ge mo amukaṃ māraya hūṃ phaṭ.

Meditating on oneself in the form of the Terrifying One, if one strikes with the garland of mantra, even a buddha endowed with clairvoyance will die, without doubt.

For pacifying, by the recitation in the first stage the mind is stirred; by the second it arises in the mind; by the third there is the nature of whiteness; by the fourth all is pacified.

For increasing, by the recitation in the first stage glory increases; by the second one develops authority and power; by the third one obtains splendor and blessing; by the fourth one's life is lengthened and all increases.

For magnetizing, by the recitation in the first stage the mind is stirred; by the second one is able to draw in; by the third the object of focus comes under one's power; by the fourth all come under one's power.

For wrathful recitation, by the first the head is made to spin; by the second the mind is disturbed; by the third blood is vomited; by the fourth, without doubt, death.

As for the base or place indicated: draw a twelve-spoked wheel on the cloth of a hungry ghost. For pacifying, on a lotus and moon; for increasing, on the back of an elephant. For magnetizing, on the heart of a woman. For summoning, a lion and a lion cub, the two together. For causing division, a horse and a buffalo, the two. For causing madness and abduction, on the back of a deer. To make mute, place it in the belly of a sheep. For expelling, on the back of a vixen. For secrecy, on the heart of a man. For suppressing, beneath Mount Meru.

The characteristics of the ink are also shown: the three bloods, the urine of a cat, and, with the quill feathers of a raven, make the writing from the hair of a corpse. Whatever is undertaken is declared certain to be accomplished.

Then the Blessed One addressed the supreme meditative absorption, the King of Initiation, with these words:

In this tantra of definitive teaching,
how is the recitation of the wrathful one?
How is the recitation of the Mother?
How are the mantras of the mātaris?
How are the mantras of the wrathful ones?
That wrathful one who destroys aversion...

Thus he spoke:

The wrathful father and mother are placed on the tongue.
The mantras of the mātaris are of great blessing and power.
Many wrathful ones radiate light.
Their recitations are these:

Oṃ akrodhe kāyamānta kakāla rūpa pacate ni hūṃ phaṭ. Oṃ aṃ hūṃ patāli rakṣamana. Oṃ roga mdunbhyo. Camuṇḍa kikimabhyo. Namgrumabayatibhyo. Oṃ oṃ oṃ. Krodha vajra basmi. Vajra krodha mala. Vajra krodha tiṣṭha. Vajra krodha kaṅka. Vajra krodha smikṣa. Vajra krodha rakhaṃ. Vajra krodha ḍākinī. Vajra krodha rakṣa. Vajra krodha yakṣa. Vajra krodha kuṇḍalī. Vajra krodha krita. Vajra loka. Vajra basmi. Vajra śūla. Vajra kulan. Vajra kaṅka. Vajra mula. Vajra srita. Vajra bamu. Vajra śūla. Vajra smara. Hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ. Hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ, hūṃ. Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ. Bhyo bhyo bhyo bhyo.

Then again the Blessed One, the supreme Mañjuśrī, the Wisdom Being, addressed the King of Wrathful Ones with these words:

In this tantra of definitive teaching,
what is called "life"?
How is the white-mustard-seed rite accomplished?
What action is accomplished through it?
What is called the "dagger"?
What is the initial pledge?

When he had thus asked the Blessed One, the King of Wrathful Ones,
he spoke these words:

This meaning of what is called "life"
is the nature of reality, free of conceptual elaboration,
unchanging in all respects, like space,
unmoving, indestructible by time.
For those whose nature is the delusion of beings,
deceived by evil habitual tendencies,
it is said that obstacles to life will arise.
Therefore the practice for life has been taught.
The defining mark of the white-mustard-seed rite as well
is that harm arises from the delusion of habitual tendencies;
it is the antidote to what is discordant.
These are taught for the sake of taming them.
This too is the fruit of karma:
from former times the power of evil actions is the sign,
and it draws in what is discordant.
Therefore the white-mustard-seed rite is to be done by the king.
What is taught as the "dagger"
is oneself as the great wrathful one.
Contemplate abiding in non-dual space;
that is what is to be called the dagger.
It is born from the minds of the ten directions;
therefore it is taught as the "dagger."
The initial pledge is as follows:
In the last of the five hundred periods,
when the five heinous deeds are practiced by all,
when people wear wretched, ragged clothes
and eat wretched, heavy food,
at that time my teaching will arise.
When the wretched final age has come,
among goddesses, the one with rays of light,
among noble ones, Mañjuśrī, these two:
apart from these two, other accomplishment
does not belong to any of the awareness-holders.
Of those who have not come
under the power of this King of Wrathful Ones,
whether in the past, the present,
or what will arise later, there is none.
Whether enemies and obstructors number a hundred thousand or a thousand,
he destroys them at once,
and he even makes a rain of blood fall.

Having spoken thus, all these world-realms were subdued, and wrathful activity was accomplished.

Then the retinue praised Mañjuśrī, the wrathful Yamāntaka (Slayer of Death), with these words:

Noble wrathful Mañjuśrī, Slayer of the Lord of Death,
from the nature of the dharmakāya, the awakening mind,
through the pure essence of the four immeasurables,
you display a blazing wrathful body of your own self,
and the fierce Brahmā, Indra, and the Great God (Śiva)
you liberate by the non-dual awakening mind.
Upon a buffalo, your feet stand, one stretched, one drawn in.
With the staffs of karma you grind them to dust.
Adorned with kings of the nāgas,
at the ears, the throat, the head, the hands and feet,
they are certainly coiled about the five limbs.
Your hair, black and dark, bristles and blazes upward.
Your three eyes behold the meaning of non-dual liberation.
A garland of severed heads is made your crown ornament.
Your tongue and fangs coil and blaze like lightning.

Your fearsome, wrathful face, with its eyes, is opened wide.
Fresh human skin is draped upon your upper body,
and fresh tiger skin is made an ornament for your form.
Such is your blazing bodily hue and the attire you wear.
Wondrous, marvelous, mighty one, I pay homage to you.

Having offered praise in this way, they became non-dual.

This is the fourteenth chapter of the noble Tantra of the Secret Wheel of the Four Actions.

Here ends the Later Tantra, the Ordered Arrangement, from the noble Tantra of the Secret Wheel of the Four Actions.

This concludes the translation. The following are translator's notes.

The opening Sanskrit title is rendered as given; its Tibetan title is translated directly. The line identifying Mañjuśrī with Yamāntaka (the Slayer of Death) follows the Tibetan "gshin rje gshed." The mantra is given in a Sanskrit reconstruction of the Tibetan transliteration and is not translated. The passage describes union imagery in the tantric idiom; it is rendered as the text presents it, in the sense of nondual method and wisdom. The lines about the Tathāgatas being drawn into the experience of the body through their consorts' delight are obscure in the Tibetan, and the rendering is cautious.  The mantra syllables are given in the Tibetan's own transliteration and reconstructed only lightly; several (for example "ruru duna," "jaja yava," "yaśuk") are opaque and may be corrupt. The verse on the mandala's layout is terse and technical; terms such as "buffalo field," "tips," and "fields" refer to features of the drawn wheel and I have kept them close to the Tibetan. "Slayer of Yama" renders the wrathful king's name Yamāntaka, and "wasteland spirits" renders the Tibetan's "spyang-ki" (jackal-like) beings loosely. The line "fixed the vajra pin" (rdo rje gsor byas) is rendered literally; its precise ritual sense is uncertain.  Several names in the maṇḍala (Yavati, Dmigs-pa, the Ox-Headed One, the Purifier) are uncertain or rendered tentatively from the Tibetan; the Sanskrit forms of the mantras are copied as given and may be corrupt. The line "the one called Yavati" and the phrase about Jambhala's form are literal and obscure. The passage breaks off mid-sentence, so the final lines are left unfinished.  The mantra syllables are rendered by approximate Sanskrit reconstruction from the Tibetan transliteration. "Akro" is likely a corruption of "krodha" or "akrama" but is left as given. The line mentioning "the essence of a mother's hand" and "rock salt mixed with mustard" is obscure and rendered literally. The Lord of Death (Yama) and Mañjuśrī Yamāri are glossed from the context.  The chapter colophon here names the preceding section as the fifth chapter, on the fierce rite, although the earlier passage announced the fourth chapter on empowerment; I follow the Tibetan as given. Several lines are corrupt or obscure: "the cut corners" (gru chad), "the gau," "gorocana" for gi wang, and "the great ash and the resin" (thal chen rgya shug). Mantra syllables are transliterated as given and are not translated. In the verse on the dharmakāya, the sequence of two kāyas is rendered as the text states it.  The mantra syllables are transliterated as they appear in the Tibetan, which is often corrupt. Chegemo is probably a transliterated name or term for the enemy or target, and I have left it untranslated. The line about doing the rite "for the sake of a fish" is obscure in the Tibetan; I translated it literally. The meaning of "the great substances" (the Tibetan reads simply "great" after the fat) is likewise uncertain, probably a reference to the standard ritual substances.  The Tibetan mantra syllables are transliterated and not translated; "Chegemo" follows the preceding passage's rendering. The list of six qualities in the corpse-seeking verses is irregular in the Tibetan (the sixth item is the crow scorching wood, while the later caste list adds the monkey and others), and the mapping of animals to caste and terrain follows the text as given. The line on the three phases and "the three" after the dagger placement is terse and its doctrinal articulation is somewhat compressed in the original. The eight deities, matched to the four consciousnesses and four sense faculties, are taken as the eight in the dagger visualization.  The Tibetan itself is partly corrupt or obscure. "Rgya grams rgya" and "rgya shug bkus pa" are rendered as best understood (crossed-vajra seal; gathered seal-substance). Some verses are very terse, and the mantras are transliterated as given. "ཨ་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་རྟེན" is taken as the syllable Ā firmly set. The final phrase "dri za" is rendered as gandharva.  Several mantra syllables and the "ya ma na te ra ca" sequence are transliterated as they stand; the verses on the six misleading rites and the maṇḍala-drawing are terse and partly obscure, so the rendering stays close to the wording. "Antakṛt" renders mthar byed (the Ender). The passage ends mid-list of absorptions, continuing in the next section.  The mantra syllables are given in transliteration as they stand in the Tibetan, and several are corrupt or obscure, so they are reproduced rather than normalized. In "the absorption of the means that joins one to the great station" I took the first term as a final item of the preceding list. The lines on "family and years in accord" and on "cause and not-cause" are terse and may carry specific ritual meanings I have rendered literally. "Rākṣasa" renders srin po; "gandharva" renders dri za. The "six Sages" are the six munis of the six realms.  The mantra syllables are rendered as transliterated in the Tibetan and are partly corrupt; they are given as they stand. The seed-syllable analysis (ya, me, to, ñja, yo) is cryptic and rendered literally. "Bhanda" is left untranslated as a transliterated implement. The passage ends mid-instruction. "Ender" renders mthar byed (Skt. antaka), the wrathful form here associated with Yama.  The mantras are given in my reconstruction of the Tibetan transliteration and are partly corrupt, especially the second one, so their Sanskrit is uncertain. In the description of the figure, the items "a clear one," "the great field and the good fortune," and the epithets of the Ender are obscure in the Tibetan and rendered literally. "Vasuta" for the noose is a tentative reconstruction. In the first verse the "mouth that holds the offering" renders a difficult compound for the hearth's opening. The fire hearth description appears to compress several lines of ritual instruction, and the terms for the hand implements are uncertain.  Several Tibetan phrases are cryptic or corrupt, so my renderings are provisional. This applies to the seed-syllable glosses (yā, tsa, ni, ra, ma) and the line about the "arisen one" burning with kṣe. It also applies to "field-devourer" and "field-staff" (ཞིང་ཆེན and ཞིང་དབྱུག), which I take as a ritual implement of Yama, and to "looking in one direction." The mantras are transliterated as given, with minor normalization. The chapter number here is twelve, following the previous passage's eleven. "Yama Ender" renders Yamāntaka (Yama Mathārbyed); the previous passage used "Ender" for the nāga, so I kept it. The tiger-skin line has a doctrinal gloss: the three poisons slain in their place, with the body as dharmakāya. The final song of exhortation breaks off at the passage's end, with its second couplet incomplete.  The mantra syllables are rendered in transliteration as given, since they are largely uninterpretable and the Tibetan transliterations appear corrupt in places. "Chegemo" is a mantric name, left untranslated. "Yamana" is likely a mantric or proper name, left in transliteration. "Thousandfold world-system" renders the stong khams (Skt. sahasra-lokadhātu). The passage breaks off mid-sentence, as the source text does.  The mantra syllables are given as transliterated from the Tibetan, since the underlying Sanskrit is corrupt and uncertain. The line "ཉི་མ་བཞི་ལ་ལས་བཞི་ཞིག" ("for four days, four actions") is translated literally; the exact sense of "days" here is somewhat obscure. The lines on the wheel and on tantra are compressed etymological wordplay (for tantra, "thread"), and the renderings are interpretive. The line "སྐུ་གསུམ་ཕྲིན་ལས་འདུལ་བ" is rendered as a statement about the three bodies' activity. The line "ཡབ་ཡུམ་ཁྱད་པར་སྤྲིན་ལྟ་བུ། ནམ་མཁའ་ཁེབས་པ་བྱེད་པ་ལྟར" is rendered tentatively.  The passage ends mid-sentence, so the final line is left open as in the Tibetan. The color term "yellow" renders sér in the first line, while the copper, iron, and other colors follow the text. The mantra syllables are rendered as a reconstruction from the Tibetan transliteration, and the opening syllables (Ya mar tsa sa to me ya, che ge mo) are partly corrupt or non-Sanskritic in the source; I kept them as transliterated. Some words in the mantras, such as "kakṣa," "śik sa sti," "kāla rūpa," and "buṣṭiṃ," are as the Tibetan gives them. The line about the "unsurpassed buddhas" gathering and about a clairvoyant buddha dying is an expression of wrathful rite hyperbole in this tantric genre, not a literal doctrinal claim. The mention of the Blessed One addressing "the supreme meditative absorption, the King of Initiation" follows the Tibetan wording bcom ldan 'das brtsam pa'i rgyal po'i ting nge 'dzin mchog; the exact title or identity is somewhat uncertain.  The mantra syllables are transliterated from the Tibetan and are partly corrupt, so their Sanskrit reconstruction is uncertain; they are given as they sound. The line "ཚེ" (tshe, "life") is treated as the topic of the practice of longevity or life-force. "Awareness-holders" renders རིགས་འཛིན (vidyādhara). The "three bloods" and similar items in the preceding passage are continued from the earlier text.  The title is rendered literally from the Tibetan as "the noble Tantra of the Secret Wheel of the Four Actions" (las bzhi 'khor lo gsang ba'i rgyud). The colophon's closing phrase, "Later Tantra, the Ordered Arrangement," translates rgyud phyi ma rim par bkod pa. It may be a section title rather than a descriptive phrase, but the Tibetan is rendered as it stands. The final line before the colophon, "they became non-dual," leaves the subject implicit, as in the Tibetan; it refers to the ones who offered the praise.

The following is a note about this translation.

This is an AI-generated translation from the AI Stupa project. It was produced by a careful, doctrine-aware process aiming at a high degree of accuracy, but it has not been reviewed by a human translator and may contain errors. It is offered as a provisional translation for those texts of the Tibetan Buddhist canon that have not yet received an authoritative human translation. Where a published translation exists — above all from 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (84000.co) — that translation is definitive and should be preferred; please consult it instead. These translations are released into the public domain (CC0) in the spirit of spreading the Dharma to all corners of the earth.

Just as the Bodhi tree now standing at Bodh Gayā neither is nor is not the same tree beneath which the Buddha attained awakening, so too this stupa is intended as the next generation of stupa — dependently arising according to the conditions of its environment, and ceaselessly proclaiming the Dharma for the benefit of all sentient beings.

May whoever encounters these words derive great benefit.
